

FOREWORD
Tissue culture technology is used for the production of doubled haploids, cryopreservation,
propagating new plant varieties, conserving rare and endangered plants, difficult-to-propagate
plants, and to produce secondary metabolites and transgenic plants. The production of high
quality planting material of crop plants and fruit trees, propagated from vegetative parts, has
created new opportunities in global trading, benefited growers, farmers, and nursery owners,
and improved rural employment. However, there are still major opportunities to produce and
distribute high quality planting material, e.g. crops like banana, date palm, cassava, pineapple,
plantain, potato, sugarcane, sweet potato, yams, ornamentals, fruit and forest trees.
The main advantage of tissue culture technology lies in the production of high quality and
uniform planting material that can be multiplied on a year-round basis under disease-free
conditions anywhere irrespective of the season and weather. However, the technology is
capital, labor and energy intensive. Although, labor is cheap in many developing countries,
the resources of trained personnel and equipment are often not readily available. In addition,
energy, particularly electricity, and clean water are costly. The energy requirements for tissue
culture technology depend on day temperature, day-length and relative humidity, and they
have to be controlled during the process of propagation. Individual plant species also differ in
their growth requirements. Hence, it is necessary to have low cost options for weaning,
hardening of micropropagated plants and finally growing them in the field.
This publication describes options for reducing costs to establish and operate tissue culture
facilities and primarily focus on plant micropropagation. It includes papers on the basics of
tissue culture technology, low cost options for the design of laboratories, use of culture media
and containers, energy and labor saving, integration and adoption of low cost options, and
increasing plant survival after propagation, bioreactors, and outreach of material to the
growers and farmers in developing countries. Bioreactors in plant propagation can produce
millions of plants and may cut down the cost of plant production, which is yet not commonly
used in developing countries. However, in the near future it could be well integrated into large
scale commercial micropropagation in both developed and developing countries. In all cases,
such options must be integrated without reducing the efficiency of plant propagation and
compromising the plant quality.
This TECDOC was prepared on the basis of contributions made by the participants in
the Technical Meeting on Low Cost Tissue Culture Technology for Developing Countries,
Vienna, 26–30 August 2002. This publication should be of great value to plant propagators,
managers of tissue culture laboratories, scientists, organizations contemplating the
establishment of new laboratories, and ongoing commercial concerns, all of whom may wish
to incorporate low cost options into their day-to-day operations. Also, it would greatly serve
plant propagation enterprises in developing countries with scarce funds and poor
infrastructure for sustainable food production. Many of the options described can also be
integrated in tissue culture laboratories that use mutation induction to develop new mutant
varieties of both vegetatively and seed propagated plants, and for rapid release of the selected
mutants. The IAEA and FAO wish to thank B.S. Ahloowalia, former staff member of the
Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture, for compiling and
preparing this publication. The IAEA officer responsible for the publication is S. Mohan Jain.

INTRODUCTION
The large scale commercial propagation of plant material based on plant tissue culture was
pioneered in the USA. During the last thirty years, tissue culture-based plant propagation has
emerged as one of the leading global agro-technologies. Between 1986 and 1993, the
worldwide production of tissue cultured plants increased 50%. In 1993, the production was
663 million plants. By 1997, production had risen to 800 million plants. During 1990–1994,
the micropropagation industry declined in Europe, mainly due to production shifting to
developing countries, but since then because of the demand for high quality and number,
production in European countries has increased. Since 1995, production has increased by 14%
in Asian countries, mainly due to the market entry of China, while the increase in South and
Central America was from production in Cuba. More recently, some companies from Israel,
the USA and UK have shifted their production requirements to Costa Rica and India. Tissue
cultured plants have as yet to reach many growers and farmers in the developing countries.
The primary advantage of micropropagation is the rapid production of high quality,
disease-free and uniform planting material. The plants can be multiplied under a controlled
environment, anywhere, irrespective of the season and weather, on a year-round basis.
Production of high quality and healthy planting material of ornamentals, and forest and fruit
trees, propagated from vegetative parts, has created new opportunities in global trading for
producers, farmers, and nursery owners, and for rural employment.
Micropropagation technology is more expensive than the conventional methods of plant
propagation, and requires several types of skills. It is a capital-intensive industry, and in some
cases the unit cost per plant becomes unaffordable. The major reasons are cost of production
and know-how. During the early years of the technology, there were difficulties in selling
tissue culture products because the conventional planting material was much cheaper. Now
this problem has been addressed by inventing reliable and cost effective tissue culture
methods without compromising on quality. This requires a constant monitoring of the input
costs of chemicals, media, energy, labour and capital. In the industrialized countries, labour is
the main factor that contributes to the high cost of production of tissue-cultured plants. To
reduce such costs, some steps can be partially mechanized, e.g. use of a peristaltic pump for
medium dispensing, and of dishwashers for cleaning containers. In the less developed
countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin America, where labour is relatively cheaper, consumables
such as media, culture containers, and electricity make a comparatively greater contribution to
production costs. For example, the cost of medium preparation (chemicals, energy and labour)
can account for 30–35% of the micropropagated plant production. However, automated
production processes based on pre-sterilized membrane capsules, bioreactors, mechanized
explant transfer, and container sealing are not commercially viable propositions in many
developing countries. Therefore, low cost alternatives are needed to reduce production cost of
tissue-cultured plants.
Many of the low cost technology options described in this publication can be
incorporated in various steps of plant micropropagation. The occasional tissue culturegenerated variants (somaclones) and rare spontaneous bud mutants as well as those obtained
from induced mutations can also be propagated by deployment of low cost techniques
described. Micropropagation, in combination with radiation-induced mutations, speeds up the
recovery, multiplication and release of improved varieties in vegetatively propagated plants.
Hence, low cost technology will be of great value for large scale plant multiplication of
mutants of many fruits, shrubs, flowers and forest trees that are conventionally vegetatively
propagated.

1

PLANT TISSUE CULTURE
B.S. AHLOOWALIA
Vienna, Austria
J. PRAKASH
In Vitro International Pvt. Ltd,
Bangalore, India
V.A. SAVANGIKAR, C. SAVANGIKAR
Nashik, India
Abstract. Plant tissue culture refers to growing and multiplication of cells, tissues and organs of plants
on defined solid or liquid media under aseptic and controlled environment. The commercial
technology is primarily based on micropropagation, in which rapid proliferation is achieved from tiny
stem cuttings, axillary buds, and to a limited extent from somatic embryos, cell clumps in suspension
cultures and bioreactors. The cultured cells and tissue can take several pathways. The pathways that
lead to the production of true-to-type plants in large numbers are the preferred ones for commercial
multiplication. The process of micropropagation is usually divided into several stages i.e., prepropagation, initiation of explants, subculture of explants for proliferation, shooting and rooting, and
hardening. These stages are universally applicable in large-scale multiplication of plants. The delivery
of hardened small micropropagated plants to growers and market also requires extra care.

INTRODUCTION
Plant tissue culture refers to growing and multiplication of cells, tissues and organs on
defined solid or liquid media under aseptic and controlled environment. Plant tissue culture
technology is being widely used for large-scale plant multiplication. The commercial
technology is primarily based on micropropagation, in which rapid proliferation is achieved
from tiny stem cuttings, axillary buds, and to a limited extent from somatic embryos, cell
clumps in suspension cultures and bioreactors.
EXPLANT SOURCE
Plant tissue cultures are initiated from tiny pieces, called explants, taken from any part
of a plant. Practically all parts of a plant have been used successfully as a source of explants.
In practice, the “explant” is removed surgically, surface sterilized and placed on a nutrient
medium to initiate the mother culture, that is multiplied repeatedly by subculture. The
following plant parts are extensively used in commercial micropropagation.
Shoot-tip and meristem-tip culture: Shoots develop from a small group of cells known
as shoot apical meristem. The apical meristem maintains itself, gives rise to new tissues and
organs, and communicates signals to the rest of the plant (Medford, 1992). Shoot-tips and
meristem-tips are perhaps the most popular source of explants to initiate tissue cultures. The
shoot apex explant measures between 100 to 500µm and includes the apical meristem with 1
to 3 leaf primordia. The apical meristem of a shoot is the portion lying distal to the youngest
leaf primordium (Cutter, 1965), and is ca.100µm in diameter and 250µm in length (Quak,
1977) with 800-1200 cells. In practice, shoot-tip explants between 100 to 1000µm are
cultured to free plants from viruses. Even explants larger than 1000µm have been frequently

3

used. The term “meristem-tip culture” has been suggested to distinguish the large explants
from those used in conventional propagation (Bhojwani and Razdan, 1983).
Nodal or axillary bud culture: This consists of a piece of stem with axillary bud culture
with or without a portion of shoot. When only the axillary bud is taken, it is designated as
“axillary bud” culture.
Floral meristem and bud culture: Such explants are not commonly used in commercial
propagation, but floral meristems and buds can generate complete plants.
Other sources of explants: In some plants, leaf discs, intercalary meristems from nodes,
small pieces of stems, immature zygotic embryos and nucellus have also been used as
explants to initiate cultures.
Cell suspension and callus cultures: Plant parts such as leaf discs, intercalary
meristems, - stem-pieces, immature embryos, anthers, pollen, microspores and ovules have
been cultured to initiate callus. A callus is a mass of unorganized cells, which in many cases,
upon transfer to suitable medium, is capable of giving rise to shoot-buds and somatic
embryos, which then form complete plants. Such calli on culture in liquid media on shakers
are used for initiating cell suspensions. Liquid suspension cultures maintained on mechanical
shakers achieve fast and excellent multiplication rates. However, in commercial
micropropagation, calli are cultured mostly in bottles and flasks kept on semi-solid or liquid
media. To a limited extent, bioreactors (Cf. Chapter 6) have become popular for somatic
embryogenic cultures. It is considered that some day robotics could be adapted to bioreactorbased micropropagation.
PATHWAYS OF CULTURED CELLS AND TISSUES
The cultured cells and tissue can take several pathways to produce a complete plant.
Among these, the pathways that lead to the production of true-to-type plants in large numbers
are the popular and preferred ones for commercial multiplication. The following terms have
been used to describe various pathways of cells and tissue in culture (Bhojwani and Razdan,
1983; Pierik, 1989).
Regeneration and organogenesis
In this pathway, groups of cells of the apical meristem in the shoot apex, axillary buds,
root tips, and floral buds are stimulated to differentiate and grow into shoots and ultimately
into complete plants. In many cases, the axillary buds formed in the culture undergo repetitive
proliferation, and produce large number of tiny plants. The plants are then separated from
each other and rooted either in the next stages of micropropagation or in vivo (in trays, small
pots or beds in glasshouse or plastic tunnel under relatively high humidity). The explants
cultured on relatively high amounts of auxin (e.g. (2,4-D, 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid)
form an unorganized mass of cells, called callus. The callus can be further sub-cultured and
multiplied. The callus shaken in a liquid medium produces cell suspension, which can be subcultured and multiplied into more liquid cultures. The cell suspensions form cell clumps,
which eventually form calli and give rise to plants through organogenesis or somatic
embryogenesis (Cf. Ammirato, 1983). In some cases, explants e.g. leaf-discs and epidermal
tissue can also generate plants by direct organogenesis and somatic embryogenesis without
intervening callus formation, e.g. in orchardgrass. Dactylis glomerata L. (Hanning and
Conger, 1986). In organogenesis the cultured plant cells and cell clumps (callus) and mature

4

differentiated cells (microspores, ovules) and tissues (leaf discs, inter-nodal segments) are
induced to differentiate into complete plants to form shoot buds and eventually shoots, and
rooted to form complete plants.
Somatic embryogenesis
In this pathway, cells or callus cultures on solid media or in suspension cultures form
embryo-like structures called somatic embryos, which on germination produce complete
plants. The primary somatic embryos are also capable of producing more embryos through
secondary somatic embryogenesis. Although, somatic embryogenesis has been demonstrated
in a very large number of plants and trees, the use of somatic embryos in large-scale
commercial production has been restricted to only a few plants, such as carrot, date palm, and
a few forest trees.
Somatic embryos are produced as adventitious structures directly on explants of zygotic
embryos, from callus and suspension cultures. Somatic embryos and synthetic seeds (embryos
encapsulated in artificial endosperm) hold potential for large-scale clonal propagation of
superior genotypes of heterogeneous plants (Redenbaugh et al., 1993; Mamiya and Sakamoto,
2001). They have also been used in commercial plant production and for the multiplication of
parental genotypes in large-scale hybrid seed production (Bajaj, 1995; Cyr, 2000). In many
species, somatic embryos are morphologically similar to the zygotic embryos, although some
biochemical, physiological and anatomical differences have been documented. The synthetic
auxin, 2,4-D is commonly used for embryo induction. In many angiosperms, e.g., carrot (Lee et
al., 2001) and alfalfa (McKersie and Bowley, 1993), subculture of cells from 2,4-D containing
medium to auxin-free medium is sufficient to induce somatic embryogenesis. The process can
be enhanced with the application of osmotic stress, manipulation of medium nutrients, and
reducing humidity. Selection of embryogenic cell lines has also been successfully used. For
example, selection for unique morphotypes in grapevine cultures allows production of high
quality embryos with predicable frequency (Jayasankar et al., 2002).
A major problem in large-scale production of somatic embryos is culture
synchronization. This is achieved through selecting cells or pre-embryonic cell clusters of
certain size, and manipulation of light and temperature (McKersie and Bowley, 1993),
temporary starvation (Lee et al., 2001) or by adding cell cycle synchronizing chemicals to the
medium (Dobrev et al., 2002). Cytokinins seem to play a key role in cell cycle
synchronization (Dobrev et al., 2002) and embryo induction, proliferation and differentiation
(Schuller et al., 2000). Abscisic acid is crucial in all the stages of somatic development,
maturation and hardening (Schuller et al., 2000; Nieves et al., 2001).
Synthetic seeds
The concept of production and utilization of synthetic seeds (somatic embryo as substitutes
for true seeds) was first suggested by Murashige in 1977 (Cf. Bajaj, 1995; Cyr, 2000). Synthetic
seeds can be produced either as coated or non-coated, desiccated somatic embryos or as embryos
encapsulated in hydrated gel (usually calcium alginate) (Redenbaugh et al., 1993).
Successful utilization of synthetic seeds as propagules of choice requires an efficient and
reproducible production system and a high percentage of post-planting conversion into vigorous
plants. Artificial coats and gel capsules containing nutrients, pesticides and beneficial organisms
have long been thought as substitutes for seed coat and endosperm (Bajaj, 1995). However, this

5

technology is still in the developmental stage, and currently cannot compete with the other
methods of commercial plant propagation (Cyr, 2000).
PROCESS OF MICROPROPAGATION
The process of plant micro-propagation aims to produce clones (true copies of a plant
in large numbers). The process is usually divided into the following stages:
Stage 0- pre-propagation step or selection and pre-treatment of suitable plants.
Stage I - initiation of explants - surface sterilization, establishment of mother explants.
Stage II - subculture for multiplication/proliferation of explants.
Stage III – shooting and rooting of the explants.
Stage IV - weaning/hardening.
These stages are universally applicable in large-scale multiplication of plants. The
individual plant species, varieties and clones require specific modification of the growth
media, weaning and hardening conditions. A rule of the thumb is to propagate plants under
conditions as natural or similar to those in which the plants will be ultimately grown ex-vitro.
For example, if a chrysanthemum variety is to be grown under long day-length for flower
production, it is better to multiply the material under long-day length at stages III and IV.
There is a wide option to undertake production of plant material up to a limited number of
stages. For example, many commercial tissue culture companies undertake production up to
Stage III, and leave the remaining stages to others.
Pre-propagation stage
The pre-propagation stage (also called stage 0) requires proper maintenance of the
mother plants in the greenhouse under disease- and insect-free conditions with minimal dust.
Clean enclosed areas, glasshouses, plastic tunnels, and net-covered tunnels, provide high
quality explant source plants with minimal infection. Collection of plant material for clonal
propagation should be done after appropriate pretreatment of the mother plants with
fungicides and pesticides to minimize contamination in the in vitro cultures. This improves
growth and multiplication rates of in vitro cultures. The control of contamination begins with
the pretreatment of the donor plants. They may be prescreened for diseases, isolated and
treated to reduce contamination (George, 1993; Holdgate and Zandvoort, 1997). The explants
are then brought to the production facility, surface sterilized and introduced into culture. They
may at this stage be treated with antibiotics and fungicides (Kritzinger, et al., 1997) as well as
anti-microbial formulations, such as PPM (Guri and Patel, 1998). The explants are then
culture indexed for contamination by standard microbiological techniques, which are
occasionally supplemented with tests based on molecular biology or other techniques
(George, 1993; Leifert and Woodward, 1998; Leifert and Cassells, 2001).
Stage I
This stage refers to the inoculation of the explants on sterile medium to initiate aseptic
culture. Initiation of explants is the very first step in micropropagation. A good clean explant,
once established in an aseptic condition, can be multiplied several times; hence, explant
initiation in an aseptic condition should be regarded as a critical step in micropropagation.
More than often, explants fail to establish and grow, not due to the lack of a suitable medium
but because of contamination. The explants are transferred to in vitro environment, free from
microbial contaminants. The process requires excision of tiny plant pieces and their surface
sterilization with chemicals such as sodium hypochlorite, ethyl alcohol and repeated washing

6

with sterile distilled water before and after treatment with chemicals. After a short period of
culture, usually 3 to 5 days, the contaminated explants are discarded. The surviving explants
showing growth are maintained and used for further subculture.
In herbaceous plants e.g. potato, chrysanthemum, carnation, streptocarpus, strawberry,
and African violet; the explant sources are meristems, apical- and axillary buds, young
seedlings, developing young leaves and petioles, and unopened floral buds. The following low
cost options can be adapted to initiate explants:
Sterile instrument technique
This method assumes that most of the deep-seated meristems and those covered by leaves or
other integuments (e.g. floral bracts) are sterile. In this procedure, the explant is washed with
sterile water, rinsed in ethanol, and instruments are sterilized every time they touch the surface of
the explant, and the explant is moved to a new location on the dissection stage.
Surface sterilization technique
This is by far the most commonly used method. The explants are washed in sterile water, rinsed
in ethanol, and surface sterilization is achieved by using chemicals with chlorine base. Calcium
or sodium hypochlorite based solutions, 1-3% (v/v) are usually used for soft herbaceous
materials. A cheap and ready-made sterilant is 5-7% solution of ‘Domestos’- a toilet disinfectant
(Lever Bros. Ltd., UK) which contains 10.5% v/v sodium hypochlorite, 0.3% sodium carbonate,
10.0% sodium chloride and 0.5% (w/v) sodium hydroxide and a patented thickener). The
explants are washed in sterile distilled water before and after sterilization. Other surface sterilants
used include mercuric chloride (avoid its use as far as possible, since it is highly toxic), hydrogen
peroxide, and potassium permanganate. The following protocols are available:
For soft tissues
1. Wash explants from perennial plants for 1-2 hr in tap water. Eliminate this step for
material from glasshouse grown plants.
2. Wash in sterile distilled water three to four times for 5 to 10 minutes each.
3. Dip in 95% ethanol for 3 to 5 seconds.
4. Wash once again with sterile distilled water for 5 minutes.
5. Surface-sterilize in 5% ‘Domestos’ (v/v) for 20-25 minutes.
6. Wash with sterile distilled water three times for 10 minutes each.
7. Drain water droplets by placing on pre-sterilized blotting paper.
8. Transfer explants singly to the medium.
N.B.: Sterilize forceps each time to transfer explants to avoid cross-contamination.
For woody stems (e.g. roses, hardy shrubs, and trees):
1. Collect stems, shoots, buds and store at 5 0C till needed.
2. Rinse in ethanol for 3 to 5 seconds.
3. Rinse in 1-% sodium hypochlorite (20% bleach) for 10 minutes.
4. Place lower parts of stems in flasks in 2% sucrose and 200 PPM 8-hydroxyquinoline
citrate at 23+2 0C. For items collected in September/October, add 50-PPM GA3.
After that l0 PPM GA will help break the dormancy.
5. Re-cut the bottom of stem and replace the solution after 2 days.
6. Excise the softwood from the developed shoots and use material for explants or for
rooting.
7. Surface-sterilize as in the above protocol.

7

Do not forget to sterilize forceps and scalpel every time for the transfer of explants to
fresh solutions. Use sterile containers in the protocol of surface sterilization. If explants
become brown or pale at the end of the protocol, reduce the strength of ‘Domestos’ to 2.5%.
Alternatively, dip explants in 10% ‘Domestos’ for 2 minutes and then proceed to surface
sterilize with 3-5% ‘Domestos’ for 20 minutes. If basal contamination is observed after 2-3
days of culture, explants can sometimes be rescued by removing the basal end by making a
single cut with a sharp scalpel and re-culturing on fresh medium.
Stage II
Stage II is the propagation phase in which the explants are cultured on the appropriate
media for multiplication of shoots. The primary goal is to achieve propagation without losing
the genetic stability. Repeated culture of axillary and adventitious shoots, cutting with nodes,
somatic embryos and other organs from Stage I leads to multiplication of propagules in large
numbers. The propagules produced at this stage can be further used for multiplication by their
repeated culture. Sometimes it is necessary to subculture the in vitro derived shoots onto
different media for elongation.
Stage III
The in vitro shoots obtained at Stage II are rooted to produce complete plants. If the
proliferated material consists of bud-like structures (e.g. orchids) or clumps of shoots (banana,
pineapple), they should be separated after rooting and not before. Many plants (e.g. banana,
pineapple, roses, potato, chrysanthemum, strawberry, mint, several grasses and many more)
can be rooted on half-strength-MS (Murashige and Skoog, 1962) medium without any
growth-regulators (Ahloowalia, unpublished). Good sturdy well-rooted plants are essential for
high survival during weaning and later transfer to soil. This stage is labour intensive and
expensive. The process of in vitro rooting has been estimated to account for approximately
35–75% of the total cost of production (Debergh and Maene, 1981). Efforts should be made to
combine rooting and acclimatization stages. (Cf. Chapter 9)
Stage IV
At this stage, the in vitro micropropagated plants are weaned and hardened. This is the
final stage of the tissue culture operation after which the micropropagated plantlets are ready
for transfer to the greenhouse. Steps are taken to grow individual plantlets capable of carrying
out photosynthesis. The hardening of the tissue-cultured plantlets is done gradually from high
to low humidity and from low light intensity to high intensity conditions. If grown on solid
medium, most of the agar can be removed gently by rinsing with water. . Plants can be left in
shade for 3 to 6 days where diffused natural light conditions them to the new environment.
The plants are then transferred to an appropriate substrate (sand, peat, compost, etc.), and
gradually hardened. Low-cost options include the use of plastic domes or tunnels, which
reduces the natural light intensity and maintains high relative humidity during the hardening
process. If the plants are still joined together after rooting, these should be planted as bunches
in the soil and separated after 6 to 8 weeks of growth.
DELIVERY TO THE GROWERS
The delivery of the rooted and hardened small micropropagated plants to growers and
market requires extra care. In some cases, plant losses can occur during shipment and
handling by growers. This is particularly true when the plants are not fully hardened and

8

rooted or not grown for sufficient duration after transfer to soil. Growers should be given
clear instructions how to handle the material provided. Apart from the economic loss, poor
survival of planted material erodes the confidence of growers in the technology. The transfer
of individual plants to soil in black plastic or polythene bags is widely used as a low-cost
option to provide fully-grown banana plants directly to farmers in many developing countries.
REFERENCES
Ammirato, P.V. 1983. Embryogenesis. In: Handbook of Plant Cell Culture. Evans, D., Sharp,
W.R., Ammirato, P.V. and Yamada, Y. (Eds.) MacMillan, New York. Pp.82-123.
Bajaj, Y.P.S. 1995. Somatic Embryogenesis and Synthetic Seed. In: Biotechnology in
Agriculture and Forestry. Vol. 30. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Bhojwani, S.S., and Razdan, M.K. 1983. Plant Tissue Culture: Theory and Practice. Elsevier
Science Pub. Amsterdam.
Cyr, D.R. 2000. Seed substitutes from the laboratory. In: Seed Technology and its Biological
Basis. Black, M. and Bewley, J.D. (Eds.). Sheffield Acad. Press, Sheffield. Pp.326-372.
Cutter, E.G. 1965. Recent experimental studies of the shoot apex and shoot morphogenesis.
Bot. Rev. 31: 7-113.
Dobrev, P., Motyka, V., Gaudinová, A., Malbeck, J., Trávnílková, A., Kamínek, M. and
Valková, R. 2002. Transient accumulation of cis- and trans-zeatin type cytokinins and
its relation to cytokinin oxidase activity during cell cycle of synchronized tobacco BY-2
cells. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 40: 333-337.
George, E.F. 1993. Plant Propagation by Tissue Culture. Part 1. The Technology. Exegetics
Ltd., Edington.
Guri, A.Z. and Patel, K.N. 1998. Compositions and methods to prevent microbial
contamination of plant tissue culture media. U. S. Patent No. 5,750,402.
Hanning, G.E. and Conger, B.V. 1986. Factors influencing somatic embryogenesis from
cultured leaf segments of Dactylis glomerata. J. Plant Physiol. 123: 23-29.
Holdgate, D.P and Zandvoort, E.A. 1997. Strategic considerations for the establishment of
microorganism free tissue cultures for commercial ornamental micropropagation. In:
Pathogen and Microbial Contamination Management in Micropropagation. Cassells,
A.C. (Ed.) Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.15-22.
Jayasankar, S., Bondada, B.R., Li, Z. and Gray, D.J. 2002. A unique morphotype of grapevine
somatic embryos exhibits accelerated germination and early plant development. Plant
Cell Rep. 20: 907-911.
Kitzinger, E.M., Jansen Van Vuuren, R., Woodward, B., Rong, I.H., Spreth, M.H.and
Slabbert, M.M. 1997. Elimination of external and internal contaminants in rhizomes of
Zantedeschia aethiopica with commercial fungicides and antibiotics. In: Pathogen and
Microbial Contamination Management in Micropropagation. Cassells, A.C. (Ed.)
Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.61-167.
Lee, E.K, Cho, D.Y. and Soh, W.Y. 2001. Enhanced production and germination of somatic
embryos by temporary starvation in tissue cultures of Daucus carota. Plant Cell Rep.
20: 408-415.
Leifert, C. and Woodward, S. 1998. Laboratory contamination management: the requirement
for microbiological quality assurance. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 52: 83-88.
Leifert, C. and Cassells, A.C. 2001. Microbial hazards in plant tissue and cell cultures. In
vitro cellular and developmental biology. Planta 37: 133-138.
Mamiya, K. and Sakamoto, Y. 2001. A method to produce encapsulatable units for synthetic
seeds in Asparagus officinalis. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 64: 27-32.

9

McKersie, B.D. and Bowley, S.R. 1993. Synthetic seeds of alfalfa. In: Synseeds. Applications of
Synthetic Seeds to Crop Improvement. Redenbaugh, K. (Ed.) CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Pp.231-255.
Medford, J.I. 1992. Vegetative apical meristems. Plant Cell 4: 1029-1039.
Murashige, T. and Skoog, F. 1962. A revised medium for rapid growth and bioassays with
tobacco tissue cultures. Physiol. Plant. 15: 473-497.
Nieves, N., Martínez, M.E., Castillo, R., Blanco, M.A. and González-Olmedo, J.L. 2001.
Effect of abscisic acid and jasmonic acid on partial desiccation of encapsulated somatic
embryos of sugarcane. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 65: 15-21.
Pierik, R.L.M. 1989. In Vitro Culture of Higher Plants. Martinus Nijhoff Pub. Dordrecht.
Quak, F. 1977. Meristem culture and virus free plants. In: Applied and Fundamental aspects
of Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture. Reinert, J. and Bajaj, Y.P.S. (Eds.) SpringerVerlag, Berlin. Pp.598-615.
Redenbaugh, K., Fujii, J.A.A. and Slade. D. 1993. Hydrated coating for synthetic seeds. In:
Synseeds. Applications of Synthetic Seeds to Crop Improvement. Redenbaugh, K. (Ed.),
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. Pp.35-46.
Schuller, A., Kirchner-Ness, R. and Reuther, G. 2000. Interaction of plant growth regulators
and organic C and N components in the formation and maturation of Abies alba somatic
embryos. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 60: 23-31.

10

ROLE OF LOW COST OPTIONS IN TISSUE CULTURE
V.A. SAVANGIKAR
Nashik, India
Abstract. The primary application of micropropagation has been to produce high quality planting
material Low-cost tissue culture technology is the adoption of practices and use of equipment to
reduce the unit cost of micropropagule and plant production. Low cost options should lower the cost
of production without compromising the quality of the micropropagules and plants. In low cost
technology cost reduction is achieved by improving process efficiency and better utilization of
resources. Low-cost tissue-culture technology will stay a high priority in agriculture, horticulture,
forestry, and floriculture of many developing countries for the production of suitably priced high
quality planting material.

INTRODUCTION
Hundreds of commercial micropropagation laboratories worldwide are currently
multiplying large number of clones of desired varieties and local flora. Apart from the rapid
propagation advantage, this technology is being used to generate disease-free planting
material, and has been developed and applied to a wide range of crops, and forest and fruit
trees. However, in many cases, the cost of micropropagule production precludes the adoption
of the technology for large-scale commercial propagation.
THE NEED FOR LOW COST TECHNOLOGY
Low-cost tissue culture technology is the adoption of practices and use of equipment to
reduce the unit cost of micropropagule and plant production. In many developed countries,
conventional tissue culture-based plant propagation is carried out in highly sophisticated
facilities that may incorporate stainless steel surfaces, sterile airflow rooms, expensive
autoclaves for sterilization of media and instruments, and equally expensive glasshouses with
automated control of humidity, temperature and day-length to harden and grow plants. Many
such facilities established at a high cost are high-energy users, and are run like a super-clean
hospital. The requirements to establish and operate such tissue culture facilities are expensive,
and often are not available in the developing countries. For example, the cost of electricity in
the developed countries is much lower, and its supply far better assured than in the developing
countries. The same can be said of the supply of culture containers, media, chemicals,
equipment and instruments used in micropropagation. Hence, alternatives to expensive inputs
and infrastructure have been sought and developed to reduce the costs of plant
micropropagation.
ADOPTION OF LOW-COST OPTIONS
Low cost options should lower the cost of production without compromising the
quality of the micropropagules and plants. The primary application of micropropagation has
been to produce high quality planting material, which in turn leads to increased productivity
in agriculture. The generated plants must be vigorous and capable of being successfully
transplanted in the field, and must have high field survival. In addition, they should be
genetically uniform, free from diseases and viruses, and price competitive to the plants
produced through conventional methods. Reducing the cost should not result in high
contamination of cultures or give plants with poor field performance.

11

The foremost requirement of micropropagation is the aseptic culture and multiplication
of plant material. Microbe-free conditions need to be maintained in culture containers, and
during successive subcultures. In many cases, mistakes in concept or practice can introduce
microbes in the culture containers from an external source or the plant material itself
(endophytic contamination). As a result, the microbes overgrow the cultures, and wipe them
out. Microbes may grow slowly under controlled low temperature, but they proliferate very
fast under uncontrolled and high temperature. Thus the adoption of wrong low-cost options
may make the production process prone to disasters. Low cost techniques will succeed only if
the basic conditions for tissue culture are scrupulously adhered to maintain propagule quality.
Microbial contamination of cultures is known to wipe out work of months, and can turn
into a nightmare. The best low-cost option is to discard and dispose of contaminated cultures
outright. Avoiding contamination in small R&D laboratories is not a difficult task where only
a low number of cultures are handled. However, commercial production involves handling of
thousands of cultures each day. It is also essential to maintain such cultures in large numbers
under contamination-free conditions, until they are used for either further subculture or
hardening and growing-on. Plants do not have an immune system and there is a limitation on
the use of antibiotics to circumvent the problem. Moreover, many of the antibiotics, which are
effective against bacteria, fungi, and phytoplasmas, are toxic to plants as well. Obviously, the
use of antibiotics is not foolproof or the desired method to rid microbial contamination
(Pierik, 1989). Sophisticated state-of-the-art facilities are not a guarantee for prevention of
contamination. The laboratories that succeed in an immaculate control of contamination do so
by adherence to scrupulous techniques of basic tissue culture. Thus, it is not the sophistication
but the procedures that ensure the quality of tissue cultured plants.
QUALITY OF MICROPROPAGULES
Low cost technology means an advanced generation technology, in which cost
reduction is achieved by improving process efficiency, and better utilization of resources.
Presently, both the developing and the developed countries require low cost technology to
progressively reduce the cost of propagule production. In many developing countries, the
potential end-users of plants derived from tissue culture have been the resource-rich farmers.
They know the benefits and potential of healthy planting material. Such growers are prepared
to risk investment in the high productivity potential of the planting material. For example,
hybrid seeds of many vegetables, papaya, rice, and cotton cost 15-20 times more than the
price of ordinary varieties. Yet there is a wide market for them. Hence, the production of low
quality plants, just because they are less costly, is not going to be a sustainable approach for
the application of micropropagation in agriculture. Lowering of cost of production is possible
only if the methods do not compromise the basic imperatives of tissue culture and quality of
plants.
IMPORTANCE OF LOW COST TECHNOLOGY
The potential of plant tissue culture in increasing agricultural production and
generating rural employment is well recognized by both investors and policy makers in
developing countries. However, in many developing countries, the establishment cost of
facilities and unit production cost of micropropagated plants is high, and often the return on
investment is not in proportion to the potential economic advantages of the technology. These
problems can be addressed by standardizing agronomic practices more precisely (precision
agriculture) and by achieving maximum net profits from the crops or by decreasing the unit
cost of production or both. The technology is particularly relevant to the propagation of

12

ornamental plants. Despite high costs of production, trading of ornamental plants has thrived
because they command high unit value. However, the market is limited. Over a period of
time, many new tissue-culture companies in several developing countries have entered to
compete in the limited market. The inevitable result has been the reduction of net margins
below viable limits.
Many international organizations also agree that tissue culture technology is very
relevant to agriculture, provided the problem of high cost of production is satisfactorily
solved. The role of tissue culture was clearly recognized by the FAO (1993) in the paper on
‘Biotechnology in agriculture, forestry and fisheries - FAO's Policy and Strategy’. The report
pointed to the wide use of tissue culture techniques for multiplication of elite clones and
elimination of pathogens in planting material. It also pointed to the successful tree
regeneration in about 100 forest species and its value for breeding, clonal testing and rapid
deployment of superior genotypes.
Several R&D projects have been undertaken to improve the productivity of agricultural,
horticultural and forest trees by the European Union under Co-operation in the Field of
Scientific and Technical Research (COST). Under this program, coordinated and funded by
the European Union, one of the primary aims has been to reduce micropropagation cost. For
example, the objective of ‘COST 843’ action has been the innovation of low-cost plant
propagation methods that enhance sustainable and competitive agriculture and forestry in
Europe (COST Action, 2001). The high costs of labour of micropropagation are a major
bottleneck in the EU to fully exploit in vitro culture technology. In the EU, labour currently
accounts for 60-70% of the costs of the in vitro produced plants. In another program, the
large-scale production and introduction of bamboo in the EU using tissue culture technology
has been undertaken with the main objective of reducing the costs of micropropagation.
FUTURE ROLE
It has been stressed time and again that in the long-term agriculture and forestry need
to be sustainable, use little or no crop-protection chemicals, have low energy inputs and yet
maintain high yields, while producing high quality material. Biotechnology-assisted plant
breeding is an essential step to achieve these goals.
Plant tissue culture techniques have a vast potential to produce plants of superior
quality, but this potential has been not been fully exploited in the developing countries.
During in vitro growth, plants can also be primed for optimal performance after transfer to
soil (Cf. Chapter 9). In most cases, tissue-cultured plants out-perform those propagated
conventionally. Thus in vitro culture has a unique role in sustainable and competitive
agriculture and forestry, and has been successfully applied in plant breeding, and for the rapid
introduction of improved plants. Bringing new improved varieties to market can take several
years if the multiplication rate is slow. For example, it may take a lily breeder 15-20 years to
produce sufficient numbers of bulbs of a newly bred cultivar before it can be marketed. In
vitro propagation can considerably speed up this process. Plant tissue culture has also become
an integral part of plant breeding. For example, the development of pest- and disease-resistant
plants through biotechnology depends on a tissue culture based genetic transformation. The
improved resistance to diseases and pests enables growers to reduce or eliminate the
application of chemicals.

13

The FAO Committee on Agriculture has perceived plant tissue culture as a main
technology for the developing countries for the production of disease-free, high-quality
planting material, and its commercial applications in floriculture and forestry (FAO, 1999). It
further points out that tissue culture techniques are being used particularly for large-scale
plant multiplication. Micropropagation has proved especially useful in producing high quality,
disease-free planting material for a wide range of crops. Tissue cultured based industry also
generates much-needed rural employment, particularly for women.
In forestry, the availability of tissue culture linked production systems may effectively
provide sustainable alternatives to the need for harvesting wood from native forests and
natural habitats. Successful protocols now exist for the micropropagation of a large number of
forest tree species, and the number of species for which successful use of somatic
embryogenesis is increasing. Thus in the future, it is likely that micropropagation in the
forestry sector will become commercially important. Compared to vegetative propagation
through cuttings, the high multiplication rates available through micropropagation offer a
much quicker capture of genetic gains obtained in forest tree breeding programs. However,
the current high costs will also be one of the major impediments to the direct use of
micropropagation in many programs.
The broad application of existing technologies to plantation species is important for tree
improvement in the tropics (Haines and Martin, 1997). In a small number of plantation
programs, micropropagation is being used as an early rapid multiplication step. However, it
has been pointed out that the current high costs will be an impediment to the direct use of
micropropagules as planting stock. Micropropagation clearly has a role, in the rapid
multiplication of the selected clones for conventional production of cuttings. The direct use
of micropropagules as planting stock in industrial plantation can dramatically broaden forestry
tree farming if propagation costs are reduced.
The availability of micropropagation technologies will also be useful in genetic
engineering applications, e.g., the production of plants as a source of “edible” vaccines. There
are many other useful plant-derived substances which can be produced in tissue cultures,
sometimes more cheaply and reliably than from natural forests and plantations. These include
medicinal compounds and drugs now being sought in major prospecting operations in the
tropical forests.
Micropropagation has been identified as a suitable technology in the development
projects of UNESCO in Africa and the Caribbean; however, the cost of production must be
reduced (Brink et al., 1998). Practically in all developing countries, the private industry is the
most important group that requires cost-effective technology. For example, in India of the 90
commercial micropropagation units established initially, 32 were closed down. Of those
engaged in commercial production, many are uneconomic mainly due to the high cost of
production (Anonymous, 2002) and the absence of quality tests. Hence, low-cost tissueculture technology will stay a high priority in agriculture, horticulture, forestry, and
floriculture of many developing countries.

14

REFERENCES
Anonymous. 2002. Indian tissue culture industry, Part-I. Dalal Consultants and Engineers Ltd.
Floriculture Today (June), India
Brink, J.A., Woodward, B.R. and DaSilva, E.J. 1998. Biotechnology: a tool for development
in Africa. EJB Electronic Journal of Biotechnology 1:
http://ejb.ucv.cl/content/vol1/issue1/full/1/index.html
COST. 2001. Cost 843- Quality enhancement of plant production through tissue culture. DGXII, European Union, Brussels, Belgium
http://www.mnd.fh-wiesbaden.de/fag/bio/bo/cost_843/index.html
FAO, 1993. Agricultural Biotechnology in the Developing World. FAO Research and
Technology Paper 6. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome,
Italy
FAO, 1995. Biotechnology in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries - FAO's Policy and
Strategy. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy
http://www.fao.org/docrep/V4845E/V4845E02.htm#Biotechnologyinagriculture,forestr
yandfisheriesFAO'spolicyandstrategy
FAO, 1999. Biotechnology: Committee on Agriculture. 15th Session, 25-29 January 1999,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy
http://www.fao.org/unfao/bodies/COAG/COAG15/X0074E.htm#P95_1296
FAO, 2000a. How appropriate are currently available biotechnologies in the crop sector for
food production and agriculture in developing countries. Electronic forum on
biotechnology in food and agriculture: Conference 1. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy
http://www.fao.org/biotech/Conf1.htm
FAO, 2000b. How appropriate are currently available biotechnologies for the forestry sector
in developing countries. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Rome, Italy http://www.fao.org/biotech/Conf2.htm
Haines, R.J. and Martin, B.E. 1997. Biotechnology and the sustainable production of tropical
timber.
http://www.fao.org/forestry/FOR/FORM/FOGENRES/genresbu/125/125e/arte11.stm
Pierik, R.L.M. 1989. In Vitro Culture of Higher Plants. Martinus Nijhoff Pub. Dordrecht.

15

PHYSICAL COMPONENTS OF TISSUE CULTURE TECHNOLOGY
B.S. AHLOOWALIA
Vienna, Austria
J. PRAKASH
In Vitro International Pvt. Ltd,
Bangalore, India
Abstract. The physical components of a typical plant tissue culture facility include equipment and
buildings with preparation room, transfer room, culture or growth room, hardening and weaning area,
soil-growing area (greenhouses, plastic tunnels), packaging and shipping area, and related facilities –
office and store for chemicals, containers and supplies. Careful planning is the first important step
when considering the size and location of a facility. The size of the physical components of a tissue
culture facility will vary according to its functional needs – the volume of production. It is
recommended that an existing facility should be visited to view the layout and operational needs
before starting a new facility. A number of low-cost alternatives can be used to simplify various
operations and reduce the costs in a tissue culture facility.

INTRODUCTION
In designing any laboratory, big or small, certain elements in its design and layout are
absolutely essential for its successful operation. Correct design of a laboratory will not only
reduce contamination, but also achieve a high efficiency in work performance (Bridgen and
Bertok, 1997). Properly planned and designed laboratories can reduce both the operational
and energy costs. A tissue culture laboratory must be designed to accommodate the equipment
and its use in the various stages of micropropagation in the most efficient manner. This
chapter describes planning the functional needs of an average-sized micropropagation facility.
The information given below would allow better planning and stream-lined functioning of the
facility, and thereby lead to cost reduction.
General consideration for location
A convenient location for a small laboratory can be a room or part of the basement of a
house, a garage, a remodeled office or a room in the header house. The minimum area
required for media preparation, transfer and primary growth shelves is about 14 m2. Walls
should be installed to partition different areas. Before setting up a commercial
micropropagation unit, it is essential to check out the area keeping in mind the climate, and
access to water, electricity, transportation, and infrastructure for supplies. A temperate climate
is usually better suited to tissue culture ventures. This greatly reduces the cost of cooling
required to maintain the temperature for optimum growth of the cultures.
The availability of electricity and water is of utmost importance, and should be taken
into consideration while choosing the location of the facility. For example in India, of the 76
commercial tissue culture units, nearly 52 are located in and around the cities of Bangalore
and Pune, where the climate is moderate. Hence, cooling is required only during certain
periods of the year. However, in cities like Delhi, which have extremes of climate, tissue
culture facilities require both heating and cooling. In a facility, which produces five million
plants, the electricity cost per thousand plants is around US $0.30 in Bangalore and Pune; the
same is about US $0.80 in Delhi. Disruption of power and water supply causes major

17

breakdown in the smooth running of tissue culture units. Poor quality water adds to the cost of
media.
Location consideration should also include a check with local authorities about zoning
and building permits before construction begins. The buildings should be located away from
sources of contamination such as a gravel driveway, parking lot, soil mixing area, shipping
dock, pesticide storage, and dust and chemicals from fields. Sanitation of the area is important
in selecting location.
The units should be located in areas where insect populations are minimal and air has
low dust and pollen counts. In the case of export-oriented units, these should be near an
international airport, which will reduce the time lag between packaging and shipment. This is
critical to assure timely delivery of quality tissue culture products. For new ventures, the size
of the facility should be kept small until the market acceptance is ensured.
Design and lay out of the laboratories
Plant tissue culture laboratories have specific design requirements. Careful initial
planning is, therefore, a prerequisite for successful running of a facility. The location and
design of the laboratories should take into account isolation from foot traffic, control of
contamination from adjacent rooms, thermostatically controlled heating and cooling, water
supply and drains for a sink, adequate electrical service, provisions for a fan and intake
blower for ventilation, and good lighting. Large sized facilities are frequently built free
standing. Although more expensive to build, the added isolation from adjacent activities keeps
the laboratory clean. Prefabricated buildings make convenient low-cost laboratories. They are
readily available in various sizes in many countries. Prefabricated buildings assembled on site
can also be used. A single span building allows for a flexible arrangement of walls for
dividing into convenient sized rooms.
The floor should be of concrete or capable of carrying 170.5 kg/m2 (50 pounds per sq.
foot). Walls and ceiling should be insulated to at least R-15, and covered inside with waterresistant material. Windows, if desired, may be placed wherever convenient in the media
preparation and glassware washing rooms. The heating system should be capable of
maintaining room temperature at 200C during the coldest part of winter. A minimum of 2cm
pipes should be used for water supply. Connection to a septic system or sanitary sewer should
be provided. Air conditioning requirements should carefully estimated. Electrical service
capacity for equipment, lights and future expansion should be calculated. For safety reasons,
the electrical installation should be carried out professionally. Most electrical wiring will
require 220 Volts, and autoclaves 230/250 Volts.
The areas such as the media preparation room, inoculation room and growth chambers
should be isolated as 'clean zones' (Broome, 1986). The office, storage area, staff centre and
packaging rooms can be maintained under ordinary conditions. The working areas must be
demarcated according to the activities involved in the facility. Cleanliness is the major
consideration when designing a plant tissue culture laboratory to minimise contamination. A
positive pressure module should be installed to circumvent air intake from outside. Routine
cleaning and aseptic procedures can decrease contamination losses to less than 1%. An
enclosed entrance should precede the laboratories, and sticky mats should be placed to collect
dirt from shoes.

18

The traffic pattern and workflow in the laboratory must be considered to maximise
cleanliness. The cleanest rooms or areas are the culture room (aseptic transfer area) and the
growth room. There should be no direct access to these rooms from outside. The media
preparation area, glassware washing and storage areas should be located away from these
rooms. The growth room and aseptic transfer rooms should be fitted with see-through doors
and should be adjacent to each other. Traffic through these areas should be minimal and
restricted to the personnel working under laminar flow cabinets. Ideally, the media
preparation area leads into the sterilisation area, which leads into the aseptic transfer room,
and eventually to the growth room. Temperature and fire alarms must be connected directly to
telephone lines to give fast warnings. An emergency generator should be available to operate
essential equipment during power breakdown.
ESSENTIAL EQUIPMENT
The basic equipment in most tissue culture facilities includes the following:
Autoclave
An autoclave is basically a large-sized but sophisticated pressure cooker, and is used for
the sterilisation of the medium, glassware and instruments. Autoclaves of different sizes are
available commercially. High-pressure heat is needed to sterilise media, water, and glassware.
Certain spores from fungi and bacteria are killed only at 1210C and 1.05kg/sq.cm (15 pounds
per sq. inch) pressure. Self-generating steam autoclaves are more dependable and faster to
operate.
Laminar airflow chamber
The laminar flow chambers provide clean filtered air that allows cultures to be handled
under contamination-free environment. Several types of laminar flow chambers are sold on
the market and are available in different sizes. The laminar-flow cabinets are located in the
culture transfer area. Some large-sized laboratories have sterile rooms in addition to laminar
flow cabinets.
Other equipment
The sterilisation of instruments, such as the forceps, scalpel holders and blades is
achieved with either gas flamed burners or with glass-bead sterilizers. The medium
preparation room usually has the following equipment. A refrigerator-freezer to store
chemicals and stock solutions, weighing scales for large amounts of over 10 g, and an
analytical balance with1 mg accuracy, a magnetic stirrer for the agitation, and a pH meter.
Small laboratories may locate the refrigerator under the workbench to save space. High
quality balances are essential in a tissue culture laboratory. Most laboratories have top loading
balances, which allow quick and efficient weighing. A hot plate with an automatic stirrer is
needed to for preparing the media before autoclaving. The pH meter is needed to determine
pH of the media. Some laboratories use pH indicator paper, however this method is
considerably less accurate, and can severely affect the results. An aspirator can be attached to
a water tap for filter sterilisation of chemicals and for surface sterilisation of the plant
material. However, vacuum pumps are faster and more efficient, but also more expensive.
A drying oven is required to keep glassware such as beakers, flasks and cylinders, and
is also useful for dry sterilisation of scalpels and glassware, such as Petri dishes, pipettes and

19

others. The media containing carbon sources (e.g. sugars) and growth regulators are sterilised
in the autoclave, but sometimes, aseptic filtration is better to avoid breakdown of heat-labile
chemicals. The water still is also located in the medium preparation area. To prepare media,
distilled or de-ionised water is generally used, although tap water can be used in some cases
(Cf. Chapter 4).
OPTIONAL EQUIPMENT
A variety of non-essential equipment is used in tissue culture laboratories. The specific
requirements determine what need to be purchased. Microwave ovens are convenient for
defrosting stock solutions and pre-heating agar media. Most laboratories have a dissecting
microscope to excise small explants. Laboratory glassware washers or regular dishwashers
can be used for replacing manual labour. Automatic media dispensers are helpful to pipette
pre-set volume of media. A gyratory shaker or a reciprocal shaker is necessary if
micropropagation is based on liquid media or suspension cultures. Computers, photocopiers
and fax machines are helpful for easy data management and maintenance of records. Some of
the equipment may be costly, but goes a long way in saving time and labour and is essential
for rapid communication in the competitive world.
ACTIVITY SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS
Based on the different activities of a tissue culture, a facility can be divided into semiclean, clean and ultra-clean areas. The semi-clean areas comprise of the washing room, office
and staff restrooms, where there is no need for maintaining sterile conditions. The clean areas
encompass the media preparation and sterilisation rooms, which have to be sufficiently clean.
High sterility has to be maintained in the culture transfer rooms and the growth rooms, which
constitute the ultra-clean areas.
Glassware washing and storage area
The glassware washing area should be located near the sterilisation and medium
preparation rooms. This area should have at least one large sink but two sinks are preferable.
Adequate workspace is required on each sides of the sink; this space is used for glassware
soaking and drainage. Plastic netting can be placed on surfaces near the sink to reduce
glassware breakage and enhance water drainage. The outlet pipe from the sink should be of
PVC to resist damage from acids and alkalis. Both hot and cold water should be available and
the water still and de-ionisation unit should be located nearby. The choice of electrical
washers should be based on the projected use, durability, reliability and cost, and service
availability. In India and some other developing countries, where labour is relatively cheap,
washing is done manually. The washing room should be swapped periodically. Mobile drying
racks can be used and lined with cheesecloth to prevent water dripping and loss of small
objects. Ovens or hot air-cabinets should be located close to the glassware washing and
storage area. Dust-proof cabinets and storage containers should be installed to allow for easy
access to glassware. When culture vessels are removed from the growth area, they are often
autoclaved to kill contaminants and to soften semi-solid media. It should be possible to move
the vessels easily to the washing area. The glassware storage area should be close to the wash
area to expedite storage and access for media preparation.

20

The store
It is advisable to have a separate area for storage of chemicals, apparatus and
equipment. It would not only facilitate constant availability but also save cost from bulk
purchase. Chemicals required in small amounts should not be purchased in large quantities as
they may lose their activity, pick up moisture or get contaminated (George, 1993). Such
problems can be overcome by purchasing small lots on a regular basis.
Media preparation and sterilisation area
The media preparation room should have smooth walls and floors, which enable easy
cleaning to maintain a high degree of cleanliness. Minimum number of doors and windows
should be provided in this room but within the local fire safety regulations. This reduces cost
and contamination. The media preparation and sterilisation can be carried out in the same area
but preferably in different rooms, which need not be separated with doors. Media preparation
area should be equipped with both tap and purified water. An appropriate system for water
purification must be selected and fitted after careful consideration of the cost and quality. A
number of electrical appliances are required for media preparation; hence, it is essential to
have safety devices like fire extinguisher, fire blanket and a first aid kit in the media
preparation room. A variety of glassware, plastic ware and stainless steel apparatus is required
for measuring, mixing, and media storage. These should be stored in the cabinets built under
the worktables and taken out for use as and when required. This would save the cost and
space for building storage shelves. The use of glassware should be kept at a minimum, as it
will help in reducing losses due to breakage. As far as possible, plastic ware and stainless
steel vessels should be used, as they are much cheaper and more durable than glassware. The
water source and glassware storage area should be in or near the medium preparation area.
Work bench tops, suitable for comfortable working while standing should be 85 to 90 cm high
and 60 cm deep. The workbench tops should be made with plastic laminate surfaces that can
tolerate frequent cleaning.
Sterilisation room
The sterilising room should be in continuation with the media preparation room. The
layout must be planned in such a way that it ensures the smooth movement of the containers
from the washing to the media preparation and sterilisation room. The sterilisation room must
have walls and floors that can withstand moisture, heat and steam. An exhaust should be fitted
to remove the warm and moist air. The exhaust fan should have an outer cover to prevent
entry of outside air. The fan cover should open only when the fan is in operation. In small
tissue culture facilities, costly autoclaves can be replaced by simple pressure cookers.
However, for large volume media making, horizontal or vertical autoclaves should be
installed. Double door autoclaves, which open directly into the media storage room, may be
costly but reduce contamination. A cheaper alternative is to transfer the sterilised media to the
adjoining room through a hatch window.
Transfer room
The most important work area is the culture transfer room where the core activity
takes place. The transfer area needs to be as clean as possible and be a separate room with
minimal air disturbance. Walls and floors of the transfer room must be smooth to ensure
frequent cleaning. The doors and windows should be minimal to prevent contamination, but
within local safety code. There is no special lighting requirement in the transfer room. The

21

illumination of the laminar airflow chamber is sufficient for work. Sterilisation of the
instruments can be done with glass-bead sterilizers or flaming after dipping in alcohol, usually
ethanol. The culture containers should be stacked on mobile carts (trolleys) to facilitate easy
movement from the medium storage room to the transfer room, and finally to the growth
room. The chair seats of the transfer operators should be comfortable, as they have to work
for long periods in the same place. Fire extinguishers and first aid kits should be provided in
the transfer room as a safety measure. The personnel should leave shoes outside the room.
Special laboratory shoes and coats should be worn in this area. Ultraviolet (UV) lights are
sometimes installed in transfer areas to disinfect the room; these lights should be used only
when people and plant material are not in the room. Safety switches can be installed to turn
off the UV lights when regular room lights are turned on.
Growth room
Growth room is an equally important area where plant cultures are maintained under
controlled environmental conditions to achieve optimal growth. It is advisable to have more
than one growth room to provide varied culture conditions since different plant species may
have different requirements of light and temperature during in vitro culture. Also, in the event
of the failure of cooling or lighting in one room, the plant cultures can be moved to another
room to prevent loss of cultures. In the growth room, the number of doors should be minimal
to prevent contamination. There is no need for windows in the growth room, except when
natural light is used. When artificial lighting is used, the external light can interfere with the
photoperiod and temperature of the growth room. Depending on the amount of available
space and cost, the culture containers can be placed on either fixed or mobile shelves. Mobile
shelves have the advantage of providing access to cultures from both sides of the shelves. The
height of the shelves should not exceed 2m. High shelving requires step-up stools to place and
remove cultures, being dangerous and time consuming. The primary source of illumination in
the growth room is normally from the lights mounted on the shelves. Overhead light sources
can be minimised, as they would be in use only while working during the dark cycle. Plant
cultures may not receive uniform light from the conventional downward illumination. Lights
directly fitted to the racks create uneven heat distribution. This leads to high humidity within
the culture containers, which in turn can cause hyperhydricity. Sideways illumination is an
alternative, which requires less number of lights, and provides more uniform lighting. But
care has to be taken not to break the lights while moving the cultures across the shelves.
CONTROL OF GROWING CONDITIONS
Controlled temperature, lighting and relative humidity, and shelving need to be
considered in planning the growth room. These vary depending on the size of the growth
room, its location, and the type of plants cultured. For example, a small growth room located
in the cool North American climate can be placed in an unheated or minimally heated
basement. The chokes (ballasts) of the fluorescent lights need not to be separated; rather they
can serve as a source of heat. Excess heat can be dissipated from the growth room, and used
for heating other areas in the basement. In such a situation, solid wooden shelves with space
between shelves can be used and prevent culture vessels on shelf above the lights from
becoming over-heated. However, a large growth room located above ground needs to have the
light chokes installed outside the room. Shelves in large growth room can be of glass or metal
wire mesh.

22

Temperature control
Temperature is a primary concern in growth rooms; it affects decisions on installation
of lights, control of relative humidity, and type of shelving. Temperature in the growth room
is usually controlled with air conditioners. Generally, temperatures are kept around 220C.
Heating is provided from conventional heating systems and can be supplemented with heat
from light chokes. In most developing countries, cooling the growth room is usually a bigger
problem than heating. Cooling can be provided with heat pumps, air conditioners and exhaust
fans. Using open windows to cool culture rooms leads to contamination during summer and
humidity problems in winter.
Lighting control
Some plant cultures can be kept in complete darkness; however, most culture rooms need
to be illuminated at 1 Klux [134.5 µmole/m2/s (microeinsteins per second per sq. centimetre
or approximately 1076 foot candle) with some up to 5 to 10 Klux (672-1345 µmole/m2/s). The
plant species and/or propagation scheduling determines the light intensity. The developmental
stage of the plants also determines if wide spectrum or cool white-fluorescent lights are to be
used. Rooting is strongly influenced positively with far-red light; therefore, wide spectrum
lights should be used during Stage III and cool-white lights during Stage I and II. Automatic
timers are needed to maintain the desired photoperiod. Reflectors can be placed over bulbs to
direct the light downwards and evenly. Heat generated by lights may cause condensation and
temperature problems. Small fans placed at the end of the shelves increase airflow and
decrease heat build-up. Reflective glossy paint on the walls provides an even light distribution
as well as reduces the number of lights required. Relative humidity (RH) is difficult to
control inside the culture vessels, but wide fluctuations in the growth room have a deleterious
effect. Cultures can dry out if the room's RH is less than 50%. Humidifiers can be used to
correct this problem. If the RH becomes too high, a dehumidifier is recommended.
Shelving
Shelves within the growth rooms vary depending upon the situation and the plants
grown. Frames for the shelves can be made from 1.25cm (half-inch) thick angle iron. Shelves
built from rigid wire mesh to allow maximum air movement and minimise shading should be
used. Wood is inexpensive to build shelves. The wood for shelving should have smooth
exterior, and should be painted white to reflect light. Expanded metal is more expensive than
wood, but provides better air circulation. Tempered glass is sometimes used for shelves to
increase light penetration, but it is more prone to breaking. Air spaces of 5 to 10cm between
the lights and shelves decrease heat on upper shelves and reduce condensation in culture
vessels. A room that is 2.4m high will accommodate 5 shelves, each 45cm. apart, when the
bottom shelf is 10 cm above the floor.
GREENHOUSE FACILITY
A critical stage in plant tissue culture is the interim phase between the laboratory and
field conditions. In vitro derived plants need to be gradually hardened to field conditions (Cf.
Chapter 9). Plant hardening is usually carried out under greenhouse that ensures high survival
of the tissue-cultured plants in the field. There are three types of greenhouses: Ground to
ground, Gable, and Quonset type. The most commonly used greenhouse is the Quonset type.
It contains movable or fixed benches with hardening tunnels on them. The size of the
greenhouse must be based on the scale of production. Greenhouse glazing can be of glass or

23

fibreglass. Polyethylene films or sheets of polycarbonate or acrylic can also be used. Air
inflated double polyethylene covering is the most economic (Table 1). Appropriate light,
shading and blackout systems can be achieved with supplementary lighting. Drip irrigation
systems, misting and fogging can be installed as needed. Greenhouses erected in warm
climates should have fan-assisted drip pad cooling especially during summer (Broome, 1986).
Greenhouses in colder climates need to be heated. Floor and bench systems can be used for
heating and cooling the air. Low cost plastic pipes can be used to circulate warm air, which
are adequate and cost effective.
PACKAGING AND SHIPPING
A separate area should be designated for packaging in a commercial tissue culture unit.
Packaging materials such as cardboard cartons and labels should be stored in this area. The
type of packaging of a particular plant depends greatly on the temperature zones through
which the consignment has to pass from the point of shipment to its destination. For example,
if the consignment of tissue-cultured plants is passing anywhere within temperate zones, it is
only necessary to take care of the frost conditions and pack accordingly. But if the
consignment is passing from a tropical country to a temperate country, it becomes necessary
to take care of the temperature zones in different places through which the consignment
passes. Thus, the type of packaging of tissue-cultured products varies with plant and
destination. For example, in a package of 22 kg, about 40,000 lily plantlets can be packed.
However, in the same parcel, only 20,000 Spathiphyllum plantlets or 10,000 Syngonium
plantlets can be packed because of the higher respiration rates in these species. The heat
build-up is much more in Spathiphyllum and Syngonium plants than the dormant lilies.
Similarly, only 8000 Gerbera or 7000 Cordyline plants can be packed in the same package.
Cooling material such as ice, dry ice and other material take up much of the packaging space.
Before loading and shipping, the packed items should be properly counted and
rechecked. The cartons containing the cultures for shipping to the customer should be
properly labelled with the names and addresses of the consignor and the consignee, and the
details of the commodity (storage temperature, handling, etc.). Adequate care must be taken
while packaging large consignments, so that there is no disturbance or damage during transit.
To prevent any sort of delay, ensure that the consignment is accompanied by documents such
as invoice, packing list, import permit, phytosanitary certificate and Generalized System of
Preferences (GSP).
OFFICE AND STAFF AREA
In any commercial tissue culture unit, an office is a prerequisite to manage the facility. The
office should be large enough to accommodate a filing cabinet, computer, a photocopier and a
fax machine for keeping records of cultures, shipments and to handle correspondence. Other
activities like maintaining inventory, ordering fresh supplies and accounting can also be done
in the office area. In a moderately sized production unit, office area can also double as
reception area.
The employee must be provided with changing room and rest room (washroom). The
latter are absolutely essential in the event of spills. Tables and chairs must be provided for tea
and lunch breaks outside the laboratory area. The staff area must also have lockers, fire
extinguishers and first-aid supplies. Food and drink vending machines can also be provided.

24

Table 1. Cost comparison of a hardening glasshouse and low-cost alternative*
Hardening glasshouse
8.8 x 29.2 m fibreglass
greenhouse with fan and pad
cooling system
Misting
Fogging
Benches
Shading
Tunnels

Cost US$
30000
3000
5000
6000
5000
5000

Total

54000

Low cost alternative
8.8 x 29.2 m double polyhouse
with air inflation and cooling
facility
Misting
Fogging
Shading
Tunnels
Benches
Grow lights
Clean air filter
Total

Cost US$
15000
not required
not required
not required
not required
6000
3000
1500
24000

*Adapted from Prakash, 1996.

COST OF FACILITY
The building of a tissue culture facility includes the cost of land, construction, electrical
installation and plumbing. If the available funds are limited, well-designed laboratories can be
established by modifying existing structures. For example, a two or three room house or a
trailer with appropriate modifications can be converted into a medium sized micropropagation
facility (Fig.1). Depending on the production and storage capacity, a facility can be small- less
100,000 plants, medium- 100,000 to 500,000 plants, or large-scale- 500,000 to 2,000,000
plants per annum.
The initial investment required for setting up a low cost, medium scale tissue culture
laboratory (ca. 195 m2) in India is given in Table 2. Land is sold at a premium, especially near
large cities. In India, the land and building costs work out to about US $62500. A house, ca.
195 m2, can be converted into a tissue culture facility with a capacity of 200,000 plants. The
rental charges for such a structure would be around US $5000 per year. The initial investment
would thus include only plumbing and electrical work, reducing the capital cost to US $2750.
Thus, in large cities, it would be more economic to rent than build the premises (Table 2). If
the hardened tissue-cultured plants were the end products, an additional investment of US
$20,000 would be required to erect a greenhouse. If the production is limited to-in-agar and
ex-agar products (rooted or non-rooted micro-cuttings), greenhouse would not be required.
Table 2. Cost of setting up a tissue culture facility in India
Requirement
Infrastructure
Equipment
Accessories
Furniture
Miscellaneous
Total

Rented building
2750
13885
4193
7333
521
28,682

Cost (US $)
Purchased building
62,437
13885
4193
7333
521
88,369

25

The basic equipment will cost US $14000. The consumables, such as glassware,
chemicals and disposable items would require another US $4200. Besides the fixed capital, a
commercial tissue culture unit has the recurring expenses of rent, building maintenance,
electricity and overheads. The estimated cost of furniture that includes racks with illumination
source for growth room, cupboards, benching and chairs would be US $7400. Other
miscellaneous items such as labelling and sealing machines would cost US $50.

Figure 1. Conversion of a house into a micropropagation facility.
STRATEGIES FOR COST REDUCTION
For a commercial tissue culture unit to be successful, it is essential to constantly find
means to increase the efficiency of production, and bring down the cost of production. A
number of low-cost alternatives can be used to simplify various operations and reduce costs in
a tissue culture facility.
Contamination control
The loss of cultures increases the cost of production. Contamination in cultures is
caused from natural contaminants such as dust, air-borne particles, bacterial and fungal
spores, fibres, and hair. Man-made contamination occurs mainly from body, clothing, and
from faulty procedures in the laboratory. It has been estimated that each operator generates a
minimum of 1 to 5 million particles (bigger than 0.5µM diameter) per minute. Modern, high
quality clean rooms have environment control systems that minimise contamination. Wearing
laboratory coats (which are mandatory in Class 100 clean rooms) reduces contamination from
clothing, skin and hair. Maintaining cleanliness in other working areas is equally important.
There is continuous entry of contaminants with the worker and through air entering the
growth room. A set routine procedure should be followed to reduce contamination in the

26

laboratory; however, such procedures will vary with the location (Bruderere and Luwa, 1983;
Schicht, 1985). In the absence of high cost systems, careful planning and appropriate design
of the laboratory goes a long way in reducing contamination.
Washing and sterilising operations
Costly dishwashing machines for cleaning the culture containers should be replaced by
manual washing if labour is relatively inexpensive. The washed culture containers can be
dried in sun instead of costly hot air ovens. In small-scale laboratories, the autoclaves can be
replaced by large sized pressure cookers, which are much cheaper. Instead of having one or
two huge horizontal autoclaves, which generate hot air pockets in the sterilising rooms, it is
better to have more of smaller vertical autoclaves, which keep the air cool. It is a normal
practice to use costly aluminium foil for wrapping instruments for sterilisation. This can be
replaced by stainless steel containers, which are autoclavable. Savings can also be made in
media and containers (Cf. Chapter 4).
Transfer operations
Instead of Petri dishes as stage for manipulation of culture, stainless steel plates,
ceramic tiles and brown wrapping paper can be used; all of these can be autoclaved. Ethanol
for hand and workbench sterilization can be replaced by industrial spirit. The careless
handling of inflammables used for sterilization can be hazardous. Glass bead sterilizers can be
used to sterilize forceps and scalpels instead of the conventional flame sterilization using
spirit lamps or gas cylinders. Commercial bleach has also been successfully used in several
laboratories for bench and instrument sterilization to reduce cost, and to prevent fire hazard.
Culture maintenance in growth rooms
Plant cultures can be maintained in rooms with air conditioners and tube lights instead
of highly priced plant growth chambers. The conventional method of downward illumination
can be replaced by sidewise lighting systems, which not only reduces the number of lights but
also provides more uniform illumination to the cultures. In the tropical and Mediterranean
regions, the electrical lighting systems can be replaced by sunlight (Cf. Chapter 5). The tissue
culture laboratories in Cuba produce millions of tissue-cultured sugarcane, pineapple and
banana plants using natural light.
Production planning
Most plants are seasonal in demand. To meet the requirements of extremely large
number of plants, commercial production has to be backed by well defined working
procedures and monitoring performance of the operation. Commercial laboratories should
produce a range of plants for different seasons to maximise the use of the facilities throughout
the year. This lowers the unit cost of plant production. Large-scale micropropagation is a
labour-intensive process, and therefore organising the availability of personnel is quite
important. To reduce organisational problems in big units, the management structure must be
well planned. Supporting information systems such as inventory control, production
scheduling, space utilisation and daily targets should be well defined. To produce quality
products on large-scale, there should be good co-ordination among the technicians, supporting
staff, supervisors and the researchers. The job description and reporting system should be very
clearly stated. In addition, personnel selection and training is critical for successful large-scale
production. The production needs to be periodically reviewed to meet needs of the customers.

27

Scale of operation
The physical components required for the functioning of a commercial tissue culture
laboratory can be either scaled up or down according to the interests of the propagator. The
correct design of a laboratory, big or small, will help maintain asepsis, thereby increasing the
efficiency of the unit and achieving a high standard of work. A micropropagation company in
India converted a three-room apartment into a medium-sized tissue culture laboratory. Plant
such as Spathiphyllum, Syngonium, Ficus, hosta, calla lily, gerbera, and cordyline, were
produced on a commercial scale. Delivery of the tissue-cultured plants to the tune of 2.5
million per year has been made from this unit by adopting various low cost alternatives.
Similar tissue culture facilities, aptly called ‘bio-factories’, in villages of Cuba produce up to
one million banana plants and 2.5 million sugarcane plants annually.
Significant cost reduction for large-scale production can be achieved with automation
and mechanisation. Although, automation of certain steps of micropropagation has been
investigated for the past 20 years, its commercial use has not been adopted. The capital costs
of such automated systems have prevented their application.
REFERENCES
Bridgen, M.P. and Bertok, Jr., J.W. 1997. Designing a plant micropropagation laboratory.
Proc. Internal. Plant Propagators Soc. 37: 462-467.
http://aggie-horticulture.tamu.edu/tissuecult/microprop/facilities/microlab.html
Broome, O.C. 1986. Laboratory Design. In: Tissue Culture as a Plant Production System for
Horticultural Crops. Zimmerman, R.H., Griesbach, R.J., Hammerschlag, F.A. and
Lawson, R.H. (Eds.) Martinus Nijhoff, Dordrecht. Pp.351-364.
Bruderere, J. and Luwa, A.G. 1983. An economic and efficient air distribution method for the
establishment of clean working environment. Swiss Pharma. 5: 17-21.
George, E.F. 1993. Equipment and Procedures. In: Plant Propagation by Tissue Culture. The
Technology. Exegetics Limited, England. Pp.95-126.
Prakash, J. 1996. Biovillage Biotechnologies. Rep. Asian Biotechnology and Biodiversity
Farmer Centred Agriculture Resource Management (FARM) Programme,
UNDP/FAO/UNIDO. In Vitro International, Bangalore, India
Schicht, H.H. 1985. Clean room technology: The concept of tool environmental control for
advanced countries. Techno. Appl. Ion Phy. 485-491.

28

CULTURE MEDIA AND CONTAINERS
S. PRAKASH
Biotechnology and Eco-Development Research Foundation,
Bangalore, India
M.I. HOQUE
Department of Botany, University of Dhaka,
Dhaka, Bangladesh
T. BRINKS
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Hannover,
Hannover, Germany
Abstract. The composition of culture media used for shoot proliferation and rooting has a tremendous
influence on production costs. The type of culture vessel influences the efficiency of transfer during
subculture and production of propagules per unit area. Proper choice of media and containers can
reduce the cost of micropropagation. The replacement of expensive imported vessels with reusable
glass jars and lids, alternatives to gelling agents, use of household sucrose, and some medium
components can reduce costs of production Bulk making of media and storage as deep frozen stocks
also reduces labour costs.

INTRODUCTION
In vitro growth of plants is largely determined by the composition of the culture
medium. The main components of most plant tissue culture media are mineral salts and sugar
as carbon source and water. Other components may include organic supplements, growth
regulators, a gelling agent, (Gamborg et al., 1968; Gamborg and Phillips, 1995). Although,
the amounts of the various ingredients in the medium vary for different stages of culture and
plant species, the basic MS (Murashige and Skoog, 1962) and LS (Linsmaier and Skoog,
1965) are the most widely used media.
During the past decades, many types of media have been developed for in vitro plant
culture (Street and Shillito, 1977; Pierik, 1989; Torres, 1989). Media compositions have been
formulated for the specific plants and tissues (Nitsch and Nitsch, 1969; Conger, 1981). Some
tissues respond much better on solid media while others on liquid media. In general, the
choice of medium is dictated by the purpose and the plant species or variety to be cultured.
The ratio of auxins to cytokinins in the culture medium is important since their combination
determines the morphogenic response for root and shoot formation. Plant extracts such as
coconut milk, banana extract, and tomato juice can be very effective in providing undefined
mixture of organic nutrients and growth factors. A variety of other media components have
also been used for specific purposes. The osmolarity of the culture medium, agitation, and
aeration of suspension cultures have an important influence on plant cell division. The
medium can be solid, semi-solid or liquid, depending on the presence or absence of gelling
agents.

29

LOW COST MEDIA OPTIONS
Media chemicals cost less than 15% of micro-plant production (Prakash, 1993). In
some cases the cost may be as low as 5%. Of the medium components, the gelling agents such
as agar contribute 70% of the costs. Other ingredients in the media - salts, sugar and growth
regulators - have minimal influence on production cost and are reasonably cheap. However,
low cost options are available to replace expensive gelling agents, sugars and reduce the cost
of water. For example, the water from distillation apparatus or passing through Millipore
filters can be replaced with ordinary tap water in some cases.
Gelling agents
The growth of cultures and production of shoots or roots is strongly influenced by the
physical consistency of the culture medium. Gelling agents are usually added to the culture
medium to increase its viscosity as a result of which plant tissues and organs remain above the
surface of the nutrient medium. Many gelling agents are used for plant culture media, e.g.,
agar, ‘Agarose’, and ‘Gellan gum’, and are marketed under trade names such as ‘Phytagel,
Gelrite’ (Sigma Co., Merck & Co. Inc, Kelco division), and ‘Gel-Gro’ (ICA Biochemicals).
Agar is the most commonly used gelling agent for preparation of solid and semi-solid media.
It contributes to the matrix potential, the humidity and affects the availability of water and
dissolved substances in the culture containers (Debergh, 1983). Various brands and grades of
agar are available commercially, which differ in the amounts of impurities, and gelling
capacity. Agar brands vary widely in price, performance and composition. It is the actual use
and experience, which ultimately determines the choice of agar brand in a specific system and
for a plant species. It is usually unnecessary to use high purity agar for large-scale
micropropagation; cheaper brands of agar have been successfully used for industrial scale
micropropagation (Boxus, 1978).
The lowest concentration of agar, which can be used, depends on its purity and brand.
Agar is usually used at 0.6-0.8% (w/v). It is advisable to prepare sample media in small
quantities using various concentrations of agar, e.g., 0.7, 0.75, 0.8, 0.85 and 0.9%. The
appropriate concentration should then be used for large-scale production purposes. In addition
to cost saving, there are a number of other advantages in using low concentrations of gelling
agents. A semi-solid medium ensures adequate contact between the plant tissue and the
medium. It is beneficial to growth as it allows better diffusion of medium constituents, and is
easily removed from plantlets before their transfer to in vivo conditions. For these reasons, a
semi-solid medium is often preferred over solid medium.
Alternatives to agar
Cheaper alternatives to agar include various types of starches and plant gums (Pierik,
1989, Nagamori and Kobayashi, 2001). The National Research Development Corporation,
India (NRDC, 2002) has listed low cost agar alternatives, which are worth evaluating for
routine use in commercial micropropagation. Gelrite can be replaced with starch-Gelrite
mixture (Kodym and Zapata, 2001). The use of liquid media eliminates the need of agar.
Other options include white flour, laundry starch, semolina, potato starch, rice powder and
sago. For micropropagation of ginger and turmeric, the combination of certain gelling agents
gave growth as good as on agar-based media (Table 1). The use of laundry starch, potato
starch and semolina in a ratio of 2:1:1 reduced the cost of gelling agent by 70-82% (Prakash,
1993). However, the addition of such gelling agents to the medium also has some
disadvantages. Some gelling agents contain inhibitory substances that hinder morphogenesis

30

(Powell and Uhrig, 1987), and reduce the growth rate of cultures. Moreover, toxic exudates
from the cultured explants may take a longer time to diffuse. Media solidified with gelling
agents increase the time to clean the culture containers. The low cost options to agar, agarose,
and gellan gum are listed below (Table 1 and 2).
Corn-starch (CS) as a gelling agent has been used along with low concentration of
‘Gelrite’ (0.5 g ‘Gelrite’ + 50.0 g CS /l) for the propagation of fruit trees, such as apple, pear
and raspberry, banana, and sugarcane, ginger and turmeric (Zimmerman, 1995; Stanley,
1995). The shoot proliferation was better on corn starch-medium than on agar. The cost of CS
was $1.8/kg compared with $200/kg of agar. However, it became difficult to detect the
contamination because the CS medium turned grayish-white. Addition of 8.0% tapioca starch
to the MS medium was found to be a good substitute for ‘Bacto-agar’ for potato shoot-culture
(Getrudis and Wattimena, 1994). Barley starch (60.0 g/l) has also been used for culturing
potato-tuber discs, and for anther culture of barley (Sorvari, 1986; Sorvari and Schieder,
1987). Sago (obtained from the stem pith of Metroxylon) at 13% concentration was
substituted for agar in MS medium for the multiplication of chrysanthemum. The number of
shoots and leaves, and root length were significantly higher on sago than on agar
(Bhattacharya et al., 1994). The cost of sago is $0.5/kg. ‘Isubgol’, a colloidal mucilaginous
husk (chiefly composed of pentosans) derived from the seeds of Plantago ovata), has a good
gelling activity, and has reasonable clarity in gelled form. ‘Isubgol’ at 3% in MS medium has
been used for the propagation of chrysanthemum (Babbar and Jain, 1998; Bhattacharya et al.,
1994). The cost of ‘Isubgol’ is about $4/kg.
Table 1. Effect of agar alternatives on medium solidification and culture growth
Agar alternative
Wheat flour (10%)
Wheat flour (8%)
Laundry starch (6%)
Semolina (5%)
Potato powder (7%)
Rice powder (11%)
Sago (7%)
Laundry starch + Potato powder +
Semolina (2:1:1)

Effect on medium and culture
Sloppy medium, growth of cultures poor
Proper solidification, growth of cultures
below average
Proper solidification, growth of cultures
average
Sloppy medium, growth of cultures average
Sloppy medium, growth of cultures average
Sloppy medium, growth of cultures poor
Proper solidification, growth of cultures
normal
Solidification, growth of cultures as good as
on agar media

(After Prakash, J. 1993.)

Use of liquid media and physical matrices
Suspension cultures without gelling agents are commonly used for culturing callus, cell
clusters, buds and somatic embryos. Suspension systems allow greater contact between the
explant and the medium. Moreover, agitation of such media reduces the diffusion gradient in
the nutrient supply. The toxic metabolites exuding from the tissues are also dispersed
effectively.

31

Sterilized, non-chlorine bleached, rolled, pure cotton fiber has been successfully used
for culturing callus and proliferating shoots of Taxus, Agrotis and Artemisia (Moraes-Cerderia
et al., 1995). Recently, the use of cotton fiber support to cultures in liquid media has been
reported in the commercial propagation of orchids, banana, chrysanthemum, and potato in
Pakistan and Bangladesh. Cotton fiber and MS liquid medium produced rapid growth of
banana shoots, which could be sub-cultured after two instead of six weeks (S. Khan, personal
communication). Protocorm initiation and shoot development of orchids was much faster on
cotton than on agar-based medium. The cost of cotton fiber is about $2/kg, and of agar $100200/kg depending on the manufacturer). Other alternative culture supports include foamplastic, filter paper bridges, glass beads (MacLeod and Nowak, 1990), ‘Viscose’ sponge, glass
wool and rock wool in liquid media.
Table 2. Low cost matrices
Option

Use

Reference

Cotton fiber

Callus maintenance and
shoot organogenesis

Moraes-Cerdeira et al., 1995;
Khan, Personal communication

Glass wool

Multiplication of
chrysanthenum

Bhattacharya et al., 1994

Nylon cloth

Multiplication of
chrysanthenum

Bhattacharya et al., 1994

Polystyrene foam

Multiplication of
chrysanthenum

Bhattacharya et al., 1994

Glass beads

Multiplication of raspberry
and white clover

McCulloch et al., 1994;
T. Brinks, Univ. Hannover;
Personal communication

Filter paper

Multiplication of
chrysanthenum, potato

Bhattacharya et al., 1994

Strips (2.5x15 cm) of glass wool, nylon and filter paper have been used as supporting
bridges for the propagation of chrysanthemum on MS medium. The shoot- and root-growth
was almost identical on these matrices (Bhattacharya et al., 1994). Polystyrene foam blocks
(2x2x1 cm) have been used as supporting matrix for the propagation of chrysanthemum
(Bhattacharya et al., 1994). The growth response was similar to that on glass wool, except
that explants on foam produced significantly fewer roots but longer shoots than on glass wool.
Glass bead based liquid-media were successfully used for culturing ginger and turmeric,
and on per plant basis reduced the medium cost by 94% With glass beads, the amount of
medium required is only 15-18 ml per culture container. By using 20ml medium per culture
container, one liter media will give 50 culture containers, a substantial saving in medium cost.
Ginger and turmeric plants multiplied on glass bead liquid-medium performed as good as on
agar-based medium. A similar type of response was observed for vanilla. Ficus cv.‘mini lucii’
showed higher multiplication rate although with a slight vitrification. Saintpaulia, Syngonium,
Philodendron and Spathiphyllum also showed higher multiplication rates and better growth on
glass bead liquid-medium (Prakash, 1993). An additional advantage of liquid media with

32

glass beads is that the medium can be replaced without moving plants (MacLeod and Nowak,
1990).
Glass beads have been used for the propagation of raspberry and white clover resulting
in 60% saving in media cost. The glass beads allowed easy removal of plantlets from the
medium. Glass beads have been also used for the maintenance of callus and shoot
organogenesis (McCulloch et al., 1994; T. Brinks, Personal communication). The beads can
be reused after washing with acid. The liquid-media have some disadvantages. Delicate
tissues get damaged during agitation. In some species, shoots submerged in liquid media
become hyperhydric (water soaked), and unsuitable for micropropagation.
Conventional carbon sources and low cost alternatives
Sucrose is the most commonly used carbon source in the micropropagation of plants.
Sucrose adds significantly to the media cost. Household sugar and other sugar sources can be
used to reduce the cost of the medium. Sugar sold in grocery stores is sufficiently pure for
micropropagation. For culturing ginger and turmeric, all other carbohydrates except sugarcane
juice, were suitable alternatives to laboratory grade sucrose (Table 3). Use of common sugar
reduces the cost of the medium between 78 to 87%. The cost of the local sugar was US$
0.55/kg against the $40.0/kg for the imported sucrose. In Bangladesh, several laboratories
have used locally available household sugar for culturing potato, banana, orchids,
chrysanthemum, lentil, peanut, chickpea, medicinal plants, and fruit trees. In Pakistan, local
sugar was found to be as good as the high grade laboratory sugar for the multiplication of
banana (S. Khan, Personal communication). Maple syrup (from Acer saccharum) has been
used for the multiplication (50 g/l) and rooting (34 g/l) of cherry root stocks from nodal
segment and shoot tips (T. Brinks, Personal communication).
Table 3. Effect of alternatives to analytical grade sucrose on culture growth
Alternative

Effect

Household sugar (3%)
Double refined sugar (3%)
Sugar crystals (3%)
Sugarcane juice (10% v/v)
Sucrose LR grade (3%)

Healthy cultures
Healthy cultures
Healthy cultures
Drying of leaf tips
Healthy cultures

Adapted from Prakash, 1993.

Alternatives to other ingredients
Several other ingredients can also be replaced by low cost options Commercial grade
chemicals of lower purity than the analytical grades are quite suitable for commercial
micropropagation unless deleterious effects are observed. A high degree of purity is justified
only in the case of basic studies in tissue culture. In general commercial micropropagation,
the quality will hardly be affected ordinarily by purity of these chemicals. Of all the
chemicals, growth regulators (hormones) are the most expensive. However, they are needed in
very small amounts in the medium, thus have a little effect on the medium cost. Sugar cane
molasses can provide many of the nutrients,namely, sugar, vitamins and inorganic metal ions
required for sugarcane callus induction and shoot formation (Dhamankar,1992).

33

At Dhaka University, low cost media have been developed for the multiplication of
orchids (Hossain, 1995; Pervin, 1997; Komol, 1998; Hoque et al., 1994, 1999; Zahed, 2000)
based on macro-salts of any of the Vacin and Went, Phytamax and Knudson‘s C media,
supplemented with 10-15 % (w/v) banana extract and 10-15 % (v/v) coconut water. Use of
above media eliminated the need of micro-salts and vitamins for the micropropagation of
different orchid species. Several different orchids, namely, Vanda, Dendrobium, Aerides,
Acampe and Spathoglottis can be multiplied on a medium containing only peptone, inositol,
banana extract and coconut water (Pervin 1997). In many tropical orchid species, similar
response was observed on media containing coconut water (15%) and banana pulp (100 g/l),
which effectively lowerd the cost.
Table 4. Low cost option for sugar in medium
Sugar type

Use

Reference

Refined white sugar (RWS)

Culture of zygotic embryos

Bonaobra et al., 1994;
Okuno et al., 1996; Sorvari,
1986

Unrefined light brown sugar

Culture of zygotic embryos

Bonaobra et al., 1994

Unrefined brown sugar,

Culture of zygotic embryos

Bonaobra et al., 1994

Sugar maple syrup

Multiplication and rooting of
cherry rootstock. Replace
micro-nutrients and reduce
macro-nutrients

T. Brinks, Univ. Hannover,
Personal communication

Table Sugar

Multiplication of banana,
potato, orchids,
chrysanthemum; shoot
regeneration and rooting of
lentil, peanut, chickpea

Kodym and Zapata, 2001

Source of water
Water is the main component of all plant tissue culture media. Usually in tissue culture
research, distilled or doubled distilled and de-ionized water is used. Distilled water produced
through electrical distillation is expensive. In some cases, alternative water sources can be
used to lower the cost of the medium. If tap water is free from heavy metals and
contaminants, it can be substituted for distilled water. Tap water has been used for in vitro
propagation of banana (Ganapathi et al., 1995) and ginger, Zingiber officinale (Sharma and
Singh, 1995). Table bottled water from the supermarket can also be used a low cost
alternative. However, its mineral composition should be taken into account as it may affect
pH and nutrient uptake (H.J. Jacobsen, University of Hannover, Personal communication). In
rural areas, rainwater can be collected in clean glass jars and used for tissue culture. In
Bangladesh, the change over of water distillation from electrical to gas operated unit reduced
the cost from US$260 to $5/month for producing 50-60 liter water per day (A. Razzaque,
BRAC Biotech, Personal communication).

34

Low cost option for media making
Media preparation is a time consuming process. Many companies sell ready-made
media in liquid or powder form. The pros and cons of laboratory making verses buying readymade media should be considered. Although pre-made media save time, their relative cost is
high. Pre-packaged media preparations are useful when medium quantities required are small.
The errors in media preparation from pre-packed media are also less frequent. However, for
large-scale use, it is much more economical to prepare media by mixing the basic ingredients.
By making large batches, the time for media preparation and sterilization can be reduced
substantially. However, if mistakes occur, the bigger is the batch, the greater is the loss (De
Standaert, 1991).
The volume of medium prepared in large sized-laboratories can range from 200 to 500
liters per day. The media should be made and used in small batches. Non-sterile media should
not be stored at room temperature for more than 24 hr, especially when it contains high
amounts of sucrose. These should be refrigerated until further use. Media are usually
dispensed into containers either manually or with a peristaltic pump. Manually, one person
can fill more than 200 containers an hour. In some large-scale laboratories, the distribution of
sterile media is automated. To be economical, the automation must be able handle many
hundred containers per hour.
Handling stock solutions
Usually the stock solutions are prepared in 10x to 1000x concentrations. The stock
solutions consist of groups of chemicals, e.g. macronutrients, micronutrients, vitamins and
plant growth hormones. The inorganic chemicals and vitamins solutions can be combined into
a single, 10 X concentrated, stock solution. The stock solutions can then be frozen in plastic
bags in volumes sufficient to make 1 to 5 liter media at a time. The cost of the medium
prepared in the above way is much cheaper than the ready-made powdered media. This is
being practiced for long time in many developing countries.
Cost of medium
Depending on the plant species, the cost of culture medium varies with the ingredients
such as sugars, gelling agents, and growth hormones used. Based on the current price of the
various ingredients, the estimated cost of one-liter MS medium works out to be $0.18 for the
solid and $0.08 for the liquid medium. If sucrose were not added, as in the case of autotrophic
micropropagation, cost per liter would be $0.13 for the solid and only $0.03 for the liquid
medium. The cost of medium per plant depends on the amount dispensed and the rate of plant
multiplication per culture container.
Autotrophic micropropagation
Plants with functional chloroplasts can grow in vitro on media without sugar, provided
the micropropagation environment is modified to enable photosynthesis. The growth of plants
on sugar-free medium, but with the carbon dioxide enriched environment was similar to
sugar-containing media (Kozai and Iwanami, 1988). Plants such as carnation,
chrysanthemum, Cymbidium, Primula, potato and strawberry have been successfully grown
using the above technique, termed as PTCS-‘Photoautotrophic Tissue Culture System’. In the

35

autotrophic system, plants are grown in large containers where the air content (oxygen, carbon
dioxide, relative humidity, etc) and the composition of the culture medium is easily controlled
(Fujiwara et al., 1987). This system has several advantages that include reduction in
production cost because of large culture vessels, simple culture media formulations, and lower
incidence of culture contamination. Plants grown in such strongly aerated vessels require little
or no hardening.
CULTURE CONTAINERS
A wide variety of culture containers are available on the market. The plant performance
and cost of the containers should be used as the prime criterion in choosing the appropriate
type. Depending upon the scale of production, different types of containers are deployed for
culture initiation, maintenance of mother cultures and sub-culture for multiplication. For
shipment of plants, disposable containers should be bought as and when required. Irrespective
of the type, the containers used for maintaining in vitro plants should be transparent to
facilitate illumination and easy inspection.
Types of culture containers
Glass test tubes have been universally used for culturing plant tissues as their narrow
openings keep out contamination. Usually, only 1 to 2 explants are cultured in each test tube.
As explant growth and multiplication progress, the cultures are transferred to larger
containers. Test tubes should not be used for large-scale multiplication of plant material.
Conical flasks, 150-250 ml capacity, are mostly used for the micropropagation of plants in
liquid media, and are kept on shakers for agitation of the medium and suspension cultures.
However, conical flasks are more expensive than glass bottles, and their narrow mouths make
manipulations of cultures difficult. Glass and plastic Petri dishes are also used to culture
explants, which are then transferred to larger vessels for multiplication and elongation. Glass
Petri dishes have to be sterilized before pouring medium that has to be sterilized separately.
Glass Petri dishes are more expensive than the test tubes and conical flasks. Pre-sterilized
disposable-plastic Petri dishes are much cheaper. In both cases, medium is poured under the
laminar flow hood.
Glass bottles and baby-food jars with polypropylene caps are the most widely used
containers and the most economic and low cost option. The wide mouth makes culture
manipulation easy and approximately 15-20 explants can be inoculated in each bottle. Such
containers are widely available and cost ca. US$0.09. Such containers can be washed,
sterilized and reused repeatedly. In Cuba, glass containers are washed with a circular nylon
brush mounted on an electric rotor, and then dried in the sun by inverting them on wooden
trays. The containers are then double wrapped in newspapers and sterilized in an autoclave.
The medium is sterilized separately in flasks, and then dispensed into the containers under the
laminar flow cabinets.
Transparent plastic containers, such as ‘Magenta’TM vessels, that withstand autoclaving
and washing, are extensively used for micropropagation in many developed countries, but at
US$1.5 to 2.0 are very expensive. Also, the repeated autoclaving of the plastic containers
renders them cloudy, thus reducing the passage of light. Lately, containers are being made of
polypropylene and polycarbonate and more recently polystyrene that can be autoclaved.
Disposable, non-autoclavable food containers and sandwich boxes made from
polystyrene have been also used for plant micropropagation. Use of disposable containers

36

eliminates the cost of washing. PVC pots and jars, manufactured for the food-industry, have
been used for in vitro plant culture. The high temperature during their manufacture imparts
relatively high degree of sterility, so that they can be used directly without sterilization.
Hence, only the medium needs to be sterilized, thus eliminating the costs of container
sterilization. Non-sterile disposable plastic type containers and bags can be bulk sterilized
with gamma rays at industrial irradiation facilities. Such gamma-irradiated containers are
being used for large-scale micropropagation. Being lightweight material, these can be shipped
to distant places at a very low cost.
A new type of culture vessel called 'StarPac' TM has been manufactured (Agristar Inc.,
Sealy, Texas). It is a disposable bag, and is semi-permeable to gas but requires different
methods of handling in contrast to test tubes and other containers. Disposable plastic type
containers called ‘Watson Modules’TM (Navrish Ltd., Arkley, Barnett, Herts. U.K.), have been
used for production of micro- and mini-tubers of potato (Ahloowalia, 1999a, b). The modules
allow in vitro multiplication, plant hardening and soil growing in the same container, and
permit batch handling of cultures during all stages of plant growth (Ahloowalia, 1995).
Disposable containers have been also made from fluorocarbon plastic films (Neoflon polymer
film, Daikin Industries Ltd., Osaka, Japan), which can be autoclaved, and are transparent and
impervious to water, but fairly permeable to gases (Tanaka et al., 1988; 1991).
Vessel closures and lids
The vessel closures influence growth of the in vitro plants. The culture containers have
to be closed to keep out microorganisms but they should not be sealed so tightly that gaseous
exchange is prevented. The different types of closures include non-absorbent cotton plugs,
Polyurethane foam plugs, specially made plastic plugs, aluminum foil, stainless steel caps,
Polypropylene caps with bends, PVC film, Polythene film and silicon rubber. Culture
containers such as tubes and flasks are closed with non-absorbent cotton wool, sometimes
wrapped in muslin gauze. But under large-scale production, preparing cotton plugs becomes
cumbersome and time consuming. Hence, these have been replaced with autoclavable screw
caps made of stainless steel or polypropylene. Test tubes covered with translucent caps, which
facilitate good gaseous exchange, have been used for culturing carnation (Kozai and Iwanami,
1988). Polypropylene film, which is heat resistant, has been successfully used as closures
(Crisp and Walkey, 1974; Mahlberg et al., 1980). It is transparent, non-greasy, and can be
used to seal large containers. Sandwich wrapping films, such as ‘Cling film’ has also been
used either on its own or as double wrap on top of the lids to prevent contamination after
subculture. This is particularly suitable for mother culture, which may have to be maintained
for 3 to 6 months or longer.
Gaseous exchange is important for the availability of oxygen and carbon dioxide, water
vapour and elimination of ethylene gas build-up that is detrimental to plant growth. The shape
of the container influences the growth rate of cultures by modifying gaseous diffusion
(Bateson et al., 1987). The best size and shape of the culture container varies with the plant
species, and hence should be decided after prior experimentation. It is important to ascertain
the price, costs for washing, and the number of times the culture container can be reused. The
selection of the containers should be done after making sure that they would not affect growth
in vitro. Culture containers can be vented by modifying lids. to facilitate optimal growth.
Depending on the plant species, microporous membranes of different sizes are available
(Osmotec, 2002).

37

Low cost options for containers
Plastic bags (approximately 10x15cm) have been used for large-scale micropropagation
and are very cost effective. Disposable plastic bags eliminate the cost of washing and of lids.
Plastic bags are sterile due to high temperature during manufacture. After pouring presterilized medium under the laminar flow, the top 2 to 5 cm of the bags is folded and several
bags are held together with either large paper clips or plastic cloth-hanging pegs. After
transfer of the explants and cuttings, the bags are closed with a heat-sealing machine or by
knotting if the bags are 18-20 cm long. Plastic bags being lightweight can also be hung by
thread and do not need elaborate shelving.
In Bagladesh and India, juice, jam, and jelly bottles have been used. The orchid
producers in Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia, and India have been using old whisky
bottles for orchid culture for many years.
The production cost of tissue-cultured plants can be reduced by 50-90% by using low
cost media-ingredients and containers described in the present chapter. A private company in
India has been producing more than five million plants of various ornamentals (foliage and
flowering), plantation, medicinal, farm and forestry plants using low cost media ingredients
and containers.
REFERENCES
Ahloowalia, B.S. 1999a. Production of mini-seed tubers using a modular system of plant
micropropagation. Potato Res. 42: 569-575.
Ahloowalia, B.S. 1999b. Stability of micropropagated plants and mini-tubers of potato. In:
Methods and Markers for Quality Assurance in Micropropagation. Cassells, A.C.,
Doyle, B.M. and Curry, R.F. (Eds.). Proc. Intl. Symposium, Cork, Pp.163-164. Ireland
Ahloowalia, B.S. 1995. Waston module- A new system of plant micropropagation. BioLink 2:
17.
Bateson, J.M., Grout, B.W.W. and Lane, S. 1987. The influence of container dimensions on
the multiplication rate of regenerating plant cell cultures. In: Plant Micropropagation in
Horticultural Industries. Preparation, Hardening and Acclimatization Processes. Ducate,
G., Jacob, M. and Simeon, A. (Eds.). Belgian Plant Tissue Culture Group, Symposium
Florizel 87, Arlaon, Belgium Pp.275-277.
Babbar, S.B. and Jain, N. 1988. Isubgol as an alternative gelling agent in plant tissue culture
media. Plant Cell Rep. 17: 318-322.
Bhattacharya, P., Dey, S. and Bhattacharya, B.C. 1994. Use of low-cost gelling agents and
support matrices for industrial scale plant tissue culture. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 37: 115123.
Bonaobra, Z.S., Rillo, E.P. and Ebert, A.W. 1994. Effect of table grade sugars on growth and
development of coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) embryos in vitro. Poster paper. 24th Internl.
Horticultural Cong. Kyoto, Japan
Boxus, Ph. 1978. The production of fruit and vegetable plants by in vitro culture. Actual
possibilities and perspectives. In: Propagation of Higher Plants through Tissue Culture.
Hughes, K.W., Henker, R. and Constantin, M. (Eds.). Conf. 7804111. Technical Inf.
Center, U.S. Dep. Energy, Springfield, VA Pp.44-58.
Conger, B.V. 1981. Cloning Agricultural Plants via In Vitro Techniques. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL
Crisp, P. and Walkey, D.G.A. 1974. The use of aseptic meristem culture in cauliflower
breeding. Euphytica 23: 305-313.

38

Debergh, P.C. 1983. Effects of agar brand and concentration on the tissue culture medium.
Physiol. Plant. 59: 270-276.
Dhamankar, V.S. 1992. Molasses, a source of nutrients for in vitro sugar cane culture. Sugar
Cane 4: 14-15.
Fujiwara, K., Kozai, T. and Watanabe, I.1987. Measurementsof carbon dioxide gas
concentration in closed vessels containing tissue cultured plantlets and estimates of net
photosynthetic rates of the plantlets. J. Agr. Meteorol., 43 :21-30.
Gamborg, O.L. and Phillips, G.C. 1995. Media preparation and handling. In: Plant Cell,
Tissue and Organ Culture - Fundamental Methods. Gamborg, O.L. and G.C. Phillips
(Eds.). Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Pp.21-34.
Gamborg, O.L., Miller, R.A. and Ojima, K. 1968. Nutrient requirements of suspension
cultures of soybean root cells. Exp. Cell Res. 50: 151-158.
Ganapathi, T.R., Mohan, J.S.S., Suprasanna, P.Bapat, V.A. and Rao, P.S. 1995. A low-cost
strategy for in vitro propagation of banana. Current Science 68: 646-665
Getrudis, D.J.M. and Wattimena, G.A. 1994. The effect of agar substitution on micro shoot
production of two potato cultivars (Solanum tuberosum L.). Acta Hort. 369: 447-450.
Hossain, A. 1995. Studies on in vitro seed germination, protocorm development and plant
regeneration in twenty two indigenous and exotic orchid species and hybrids. M.Sc.
Thesis. Univ. Dhaka, Bangladesh
Hoque, M.I., Roy, A.R., Sarker, R.H. and Haque, M.M.. 1994. Micropropagation of
Cymbidium bicolor through in vitro culture. Plant Tissue Cult. 4: 45-51.
Hoque, M.I., Jahan, M. T. and Sarker, R.H. 1998. In vitro shoot regeneration and ex vitro
rooting in Chrysanthemum morifolium Ramat. Plant Tissue Cult. 8: 157-164.
Hoque, M.I., Komol, N., Hossain, A., Parvin, S. and Sarker, R.H. 1999. In vitro large scale
propagation of two hybrid orchid species. Dhaka Univ. J. Biol. Sci. 8: 11-16.
Kodym, A and Zapata-Arias, F.J. 2001. Low-cost alternatives for the micropropagation of
banana. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 66: 67-71.
Komol, N. 1998. Study on the development of low cost medium for large scale propagation of
some orchids. M.Sc. Thesis. Univ. Dhaka, Bangladesh
Kozai, T and Iwanami, Y.1988. Effects of CO2 enrichments and sucrose concentration under
high photosynthetic photon fluxes on growth of carnation in tissue culture during the
preparation stage. J. Jap. Soc. Hort. Sci. 57: 279-288.
Linsmaier, E.M. and Skoog, F. 1965. Organic growth factor requirements of tobacco tissue
cultures. Physiol. Plant. 18: 100-127.
MacLeod, K. and Nowak, J. 1990. Glass beads as an alternative solid matrix in plant tissue
culture. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 22: 113-117.
Mahlberg, P.G., Masi, P. and Paul, D.R. 1980. Use of polypropylene film for capping tissue
culture containers. Phytomorphology, 30: 397-399.
McCulloch, S.M., Briggs, B.A. and Spethmann, W. 1994. Rooting and establishment of
rhododendron microcuttings. Acta Horticulturae 364: 27-34.
McKenzie, B.L. 1983. Development of a tissue culture laboratory in New Zealand. Proc. Intl.
Plant Prop. Soc.1982. 32: 311-314.
Moraes-Cerdeira, R. M., Krans, J.V., McChesney, J.D. , Pereira, A.M.S. and Franca, S.C.
1995. Cotton fiber as a substitute for agar support in tissue culture. HortSci. 30: 10821083.
Murashige, T. and Skoog, F. 1962. A revised medium for rapid growth and bioassays with
tobacco tissue cultures. Physiol. Plant. 15: 473-497.
Nagamori, E and Kobayashi, T. 2001. Viscous additive improves micropropagation in liquid
medium. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 91: 283-287.
Nitsch, J.P. and Nitsch, C. 1969. Haploid plants from pollen grains. Science, 163: 85-87.

39

NRDC. 2002. Low cost plant tissue culture. National Research Development Corporation. 2022, Zamroodhpur Community Center, Kailash Colony Extension, New Delhi, India
http://www.nrdcindia.com/pages/tisuecul.htm
Okuno, K., Matsumoto, K. and Hisajima, S. 1996. A trial of improvement of micropropagation
of Brassica campestris cv. Kukitachina by cost simulation. J. Soc. High Tech. Agric. 8:
253-263.
Osmotec, 2002. The Osmotec Life Line. Advanced products for plant tissue culture.
http://www.osmotek.com/product.htm
Pervin, S. 1997. Studies on large scale plantlet development in different orchid species and
hybrids through in vitro culture. M.Sc. Thesis. Univ. Dhaka, Bangladesh
Pierik, R.L.M. 1989. In Vitro Culture of Higher Plants. Martinus Nijhoff, Dordrecht.
Powell, W. and Uhrig, H. 1987. Anther culture of Solanum genotypes. Plant Cell Tissue
Organ Culture. 11: 13-24.
Prakash, S. 1993. Production of ginger and turmeric through tissue culture methods and
investigations into making tissue culture propagation less expensive. Ph.D. Thesis.
Bangalore Univ. Bangalore
Sharma, T.R. and Singh, B.M. 1995. Simple and cost-effective medium for propagation of
ginger (Zingiber officinale). Indian J. Agricul. Sciences, 65: 506-508.
Sorvari, S. 1986. Differentiation of potato tuber discs in barley starch gelatinized nutrient
media. Annal. Agriculturae Fenniale, 25:135-138.
Sorvari, S. and Schieder, O. 1987. Influence of sucrose and melibiose on barley anther
cultures in sttarch media. Plant Breeding, 99: 164-171.
Standaert, De, Metsenaere, R.E.A. 1991. Economic considerations. In: Micropropagation.
Debergh P.C. and Zimmerman R.H. (Eds.). Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.123-140.
Stanley, D. 1995. Tissue-culturing plants on corn starch. Agric.Res. ??. p.11.
Street, H.E. and Shillito, R.D. 1977. Nutrient media for plant organ, tissue and cell culture. In:
Rechcigl, M. (Ed.) CRC Handbook in Nutrition and Food. Vol. IV. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL.
Tanaka, M., Jinno, K., Goi, M. and Higashiura, T. 1988. The use of disposable fluorocarbon
polymer film culture vessel in micropropagation. Acta Hort. 230: 73-80.
Tanaka, M., Hirano, T., Goi, M., Higashiura, T., Sasahara, H. and Murasaki, K. 1991.
Practical application of a novel disposable film culture vessel in micropropagation. Acta
Hort. 300: 77-84.
Torres, K.C. 1989. Tissue Culture Techniques for Horticultural Crops. Van Nostrand
Reinhold, NewYork.
Zahed, M.A.M. 2000. Studies on the morphogenesis of three elite species of orchids. M.Sc.
Thesis. Univ. Dhaka, Bangladesh
Zimmerman, R.H. 1995. Use of starch-gelled medium for tissue culture of some fruit crops.
Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 43: 207–213.

40

LOW COST OPTIONS FOR ENERGY AND LABOUR
B.S. AHLOOWALIA
Vienna, Austria
V.A. SAVANGIKAR
Nashik, India
Abstract. Artificial lighting of cultures in the growth rooms is one of the most expensive and
inefficient methods in tissue culture technology. Changing illumination from artificial to natural light
is a decisive low cost option in tissue culture. This reduces electricity and capital costs and also
improves plant quality. Maintaining in vitro cultures at a regulated temperature with air conditioners
adds to the cost. Many in vitro growing plants can tolerate wide fluctuations in temperature, and adapt
better to field conditions than those grown under even temperature. Plants hardened under natural light
are sturdy, and withstand transplantation better in the field. Production of plants based on tissue
culture technology and their subsequent growing is a labour intensive system. Even in developing
countries, where labour is relatively less costly, increasing the efficiency of production is relevant to
reduce the cost of tissue-cultured plants Hiring expertise from established R&D laboratories reduces
overhead costs and is indispensable to reduce losses from contamination.

INTRODUCTION
Reduction in the cost of energy and labour is essential to lower the production cost of
micropropagated plants. A large part of the electrical energy in tissue culture is used for
autoclaving, lighting of the growth room, air filtration in laminar-flow cabinets and air
conditioning. In developing countries, the cost of electricity can account for up to 60% of the
production costs. Moreover, its erratic supply and voltage create major problems. Whereas the
need for electrical energy is absolutely essential, adopting low cost options can a major
saving.
LOW COST ENERGY OPTIONS
Use of natural light
Artificial lighting of cultures in the growth rooms is one of the most expensive and
inefficient methods in tissue culture technology. The lights, chokes, fixtures, timer controls,
equipment to handle high electrical load, and their operation and maintenance add to high
costs. Moreover, artificial lighting generates heat that has to be dissipated by cooling and airconditioning further adding to the electrical load. Although special fluorescent tubes are used
to compensate for the red and far-red part of natural daylight, artificial light quality does not
match that of natural light under which the plants are ultimately grown. Also, the cool
fluorescent lights used for illumination provide minimal energy required for photosynthesis.
As a result, in vitro plants adapt to low-light intensity, and have a reduced growth rate.
Plants can adapt to a wide range of conditions by changing their metabolism and
structures. They develop structural and anatomical features in leaves and stems, e.g. cuticle
and wax on leaves, thickness of the leaf, fewer and closed stomata, and thickening of
epidermal cells of the stems, that allow survival in the harsh environment. However, once
they adapt to a set of conditions, re-adaptation to new conditions is rather slow or difficult.
Plant tissues formed and adapted to low light conditions are usually fragile and may become

41

vitrified, leading to poor survival under field conditions. This can be a major disadvantage in
the plant hardening process, and later establishment in the field (Cf. Chapter 9).
Under artificial light of low intensity, plants have low reserves, and a poor root system.
On transfer to soil, the in vitro formed roots have to adjust to soil solutes of varying pH. The
usual response of the in vitro formed roots is that they stop functioning in soil and new roots
are formed, which take over the function of the original roots. If new roots do not emerge, the
plant dies. One method to circumvent these negative effects is to culture the in vitro plants
under natural light, during their last phase in liquid medium, based on half- or quarter-strength
MS salts without sugar and vitamins, under either aseptic or non-aseptic conditions. If roots or
root initials are not formed, the medium can be either supplemented with auxins (IAA, IBA),
or shoots dipped in a solution of rooting hormones. This procedure provides much stronger
and healthier plants with a high survival rate.
Low cost lighting
Changing the method of illumination from artificial to natural light is a decisive low
cost option in tissue culture. This not only reduces electricity and capital costs, but also
improves the plant quality. Expensive artificial lights can be replaced in several ways. One
option is to grow the in vitro cultures in diffused natural light under plastic or glass. This
works very well in temperate climates, but under tropical conditions, heat build-up has to be
reduced by installing thermostat-controlled exhaust fans. It is also possible to redesign the
existing laboratories in tropical and subtropical countries, and replace the artificial lights with
‘Solatube’ (Anonymous, 2001), which can be installed in any roof, and redirects the daylight
through reflective tubing (Kodym and Zapata-Arias, 1999, 2001; Kodym et al., 2001). Such a
tube currently costs ca. US $600, and once installed can illuminate 3-5m2 without incurring
further running costs. Yet another method is to incorporate Southwest facing glass windows
in the growth rooms that allow indirect diffused natural daylight. By using either muslin or
Venetian curtains made of bamboo or plastic, the light can be diffused to the desired intensity.
The growth room is usually located on the upper storey of the house to allow sunlight from all
directions. Natural light has been successfully used in this manner in “Bio-factories” in Cuba,
based on the conversion of village houses into tissue culture laboratories (Baezas-Lopez,
1995).
In vitro cultures have been also successfully grown under natural light by using simple
plastic bags (polypropylene bags) as culture containers. These bags are lightweight and can be
hung in a greenhouse. They are transparent, so that incident illumination reaches the cultures
with the least loss, and near natural spectrum. The plants undergo primary hardening while
they are still developing in the culture. Such plants have well-developed stems, leaves, and
good growth vigour, and survive better on transfer to soil. With proper precautions,
contamination of cultures in the bags under greenhouse conditions can be avoided. This
system of culturing plants under plastic and greenhouse also eliminates the need, and hence
the cost, of air filtration and air conditioning commonly used in the sophisticated facilities.
Artificial lights in other laboratory areas such as media preparation, transfer and hardening
rooms can also be minimized by incorporating in the room design glass windows that provide
indirect sunlight but reduce heat build-up in the rooms. This can be achieved by using either
muslin net curtains or translucent glass.

42

Low cost temperature regulation
Maintaining in vitro cultures at a regulated temperature with air conditioners adds to the
cost but does not contribute to specific plant quality. In fact, as in the case of artificial
lighting, plants grown under a narrow temperature range are at a disadvantage during
hardening and later under the field conditions. Elimination of this factor significantly
contributes to reduction in electrical costs. Contrary to the common belief that the day- and
night-temperature in the growth room must be strictly controlled at an even level, many in
vitro growing plants can tolerate wide fluctuations in temperature. High daytime temperatures
of up to 28-30oC and as low as 10-12oC at night do not damage plant growth. On the contrary,
fluctuations in temperature promote better growth. In vitro growing plants of banana and
potato, kept at 16-41oC at 750 µmol m-2 s-1 under natural light, showed as good or better
growth than in the controlled growth room (Kodym et al., 2001).
Reducing energy costs for water and autoclaving
Normally, distilled water is produced from water stills operated by electricity. Some
water stills and autoclaving require a three-phase connection. For small facilities, it is prudent
to operate the units on a single-phase electrical connection. In small units, tap water may be
used after autoclaving rather than distillation. Pressure cookers heated with gas can also be
used where capital is a constraint. In case of large-sized facilities, autoclaves and water
distillation equipment operated on electricity is still the most economic (Cf. Chapter 4).
Reducing energy in the glasshouse and hardening area
Electrical usage can be reduced significantly from hardening plants in open shade if
glasshouses are not available. In vitro grown plants can be hardened by covering them with
net-shades after transfer to soil or by placing containers in shade under thatched or plasticcovered open huts. The plants hardened under natural light are sturdy, and withstand
transplantation better in the field. In the case of culture in plastic containers, the lids are
removed, and containers are covered with a thin plastic sheet, and left for 3-4 days in shade.
The medium is then removed by washing with tap water, and the plants are retained for
another 3-5 days in the shade before transfer to soil (Cf. Chapter 9).
REDUCING LABOUR COSTS
Production of plants based on tissue culture technology and their subsequent growing is
a labour intensive system. In developed countries, labour is a major cost factor in
micropropagation. On the other hand, in developing countries, labour is relatively less costly,
which is a major advantage. Yet, in developing countries, increasing the efficiency of
production is relevant to reduce the cost of tissue-cultured plants. In developing countries, the
access to capital is not easy and borrowing is costly with high interest rates, which adds to
cost of production. Hence, it is important to maintain high labour efficiency, especially when
the operators in the culture transfer room are not highly trained. The typical profile of a tissue
culture plant production system shows that 40% costs are for labour, 10% for materials, 20%
for overheads, and 30% for sales, general and administrative activities (Walker, 1986). The
manual transfer of explants in culture vessels has the upper ceiling of production per operator
at about 5000 operations or transfers per day. However, this peak rate is rarely achieved. In
general, 2500 transfers per operator per day are considered to be good productivity, which is
strongly influenced by the type of culture vessel used (Walker, 1986). For example, the

43

transfers per person using test tubes are much lower than that in Petri dishes and wide mouth
culture vessels.
Once the efficiency of labour in transferring number of propagules per hour has been
achieved to the maximum possible, there is little scope to improve efficiency unless
automated or semi-automated systems are introduced. These are based on the use of liquid
media and bioreactors, and mechanization to handle propagules. Such systems have been
developed and can be integrated into the production under certain conditions (Osmoteck,
2000) (Cf. Chapter 6). Accordingly, such a system can reduce cost of production by 50% in a
20 million-unit production facility. The labour cost comes down from conventional to semiautomated model by 70% and in fully automated model by 75%. The system based on the use
of plastic bags increased throughput per person and reduced labour cost per propagule by 60%
(Savangikar, 2002). Also, the improvement in contamination control increased multiplication
rate and improved survival during hardening and produced more saleable plants. In some
cases, the multiplication rate increased from 1.5 to 5, reducing labour cost of tissue culture by
96% per plant before hardening. To reduce labour costs, such systems can be combined so
that the multiplication phase is in the bioreactor and the last stages in plastic bags (Cf. Chapter
6).
To maintain high efficiency of the operators under laminar flow hoods, they should
work not more than 4 hours per day and preferably on a single bench; afterwards they should
undertake other operations, such as washing, drying of containers or work in glasshouse. The
provision of music in culture transfer rooms also increases the efficiency. Usually, female
operators are more efficient than males in the transfer rooms and for potting of plants. This
contributes to the gender based rural employment.
Reducing overhead costs
Overhead costs for commercial scale tissue culture-based plant production include
salaries of managers - directors, scientists, marketing managers, market promotional expenses,
payment of commissions, and perks to the management. Much of these cannot be avoided. The
large-sized companies can afford high overhead costs that match large volume of business.
However, smaller units have to rely on a few permanent managers, but may hire the expertise
of the specialists as and when required.
Large-scale production based on tissue culture is also prone to large-scale losses through
contamination of cultures, substandard production, losses during hardening and badly planned
and poor marketing. Many failures of commercial micropropagation concerns can be traced to
improper planning of production and marketing. While it is important to maintain high levels of
clean technology, the need for critical expertise cannot be ignored in keeping contamination to
less than 5%. The high contamination rate can become a major cause of not achieving the set
targets and throwing the assumed production of the enterprise out of gear and loss of market.
The advice and expertise of experienced persons is indispensable to reduce such losses. The
expertise can be obtained for a reasonable fee either from established R&D laboratories of the
larger companies or from colleges and universities. Such laboratories can also provide services
for quality control, indexing of mother cultures, advice on media formulations and trouble
shooting. For sustainable technology advancement, links should be established within the
private sector, and between the private and public sector R&D organizations. The shared costs
of R&D in tissue culture technology by the private and public sector is thus a low cost option to
the governments and policy makers in the developing countries.

44

REFERENCES
Anonymous. 2001. Solatube, the miracle skylight. http://www.solaglobal.com
Baezas-Lopez, P. 1995. Cubans enlist the sun in virus-free propagation. Ceres 156: 15-16.
Kodym, A. and Zapata-Arias, F. J. 1999. Natural light as an alternative light source for the in
vitro culture of banana (Musa acuminata cv. 'Grande Naine'). Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult.
55: 141-145.
Kodym, A., Hollenthoner, S. and Zapata-Arias, F.J. 2001. Cost reduction in the
micropropagation of banana by using tubular skylights as source for natural lighting. In
vitro Cell Dev. Biol.-Plant 37: 237-242.
Kodym, A., and Zapata-Arias, F.J. 2001. Low-cost alternatives for the micropropagation of
banana. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 66: 67-71.
Savangikar, V.A., Savangikar, C., Daga, R.S. and Pathak, S. 2002. Reduction in cost in
micropropagation: Achievements and further prospects. Ist International Symp. Liquid
system for in vitro mass propagation of plants, 29 May-2 June 2002. Agricultural Univ.
Norway, Ås Norway
Walker, K.A. 1986. Automation of in vitro plant propagation: Has its time finally arrived.
Genetic Engineering News July-August, Pp.52.
Osmoteck. 2000. Bioreactor multiplication. www.Osmotek.com

45

BIOREACTORS AS A LOW COST OPTION FOR TISSUE CULTURE
R. LEVIN*, G. TANNY
Osmotek Ltd,
Rehovot, Israel
Abstract. Bioreactors are vessels designed for large-scale cell, tissue or organ culture in liquid media.
Functionally, plant culture bioreactors can be divided into two broad types: those in which the cultures
are immersed partially or temporarily in the medium, and those in which the cultures are continuously
submerged. Bioreactors provide more precise control of the plant growth gaseous exchange,
illumination, medium agitation, temperature and pH than the conventional culture vessels. Bioreactorbased propagation of plants can increase rate of multiplication and growth of cultures and reduce
space, energy and labour requirements in commercial micropropagation. They can therefore be
attractive to developing countries as regards new or expanding plant culture facilities, in combination
with a conventional laboratory. However, to be cost- effective, use of bioreactors requires indexed
plant cultures, and attention to aseptic procedures during handling of plant material. Hence, the
integration of bioreactors into production systems should only be attempted by facilities with skilled
and experienced propagators.

BIOREACTORS
Bioreactors are vessels designed for large-scale cell, tissue or organ culture in liquid
media. For an increasing number of plants, they have demonstrated a number of important
advantages over conventional semi-solid micropropagation, including several fold increase in
multiplication rates, and reduction in space, energy and labor. These cost-saving advantages
have been the driving force for increased attention to the use of liquid systems generally.
There are, however, many disadvantages because of a number of problems associated with the
use of bioreactors in micropropagation. These include contamination, lack of protocols and
production procedures, increased hyperhydricity, and problems of foaming, shear stress and
release of growth inhibiting compounds by the cultures. Because of the inherently difficult
problems of contamination in liquid systems, and the lack of problem solving information
compared to semi-solid growth media, such systems involve more risk and require greater
skill. Thus, in many developing countries, bioreactors have not been a low cost option. The
potential of cost reduction will depend on the cost of labor, production capacity, crops being
propagated, contamination rate, and energy and costs.
Bioreactor vessels
For micropropagation, “large-scale” bioreactors generally refer to vessels with volumes
ranging from 1.5 to 20 l, although even larger vessels have been used (Takayama and Akita,
1994). However, even these modest volumes are in stark contrast to the standard plant tissue
culture vessels, which typically contain less than 0.5l of semi-solid medium. The size of the
vessels in bioreactors versus conventional micropropagation systems has important
investment cost consequence. Standard semi-solid plant tissue culture vessels have a seal that
permits limited gas exchange with minimal contamination. The environment of the
conventional growth room determines the light, temperature and gases in the conventional
vessel.
______________
*deceased.

47

Some bioreactors can grow 60-100,000 plants per cubic meter and provide more precise
control of the plant growth gaseous exchange, illumination, medium agitation, temperature
and pH. Since they are aseptically sealed, they can be operated most of the time in ordinary
rooms. Only the handling of plant material is performed under laminar flow. They can
therefore be attractive to developing countries as regards new or expanding plant culture
facilities, in combination with a conventional laboratory. However, to be cost- effective its
use requires indexed plant cultures, and attention to aseptic procedures during the handling of
plant material.
TYPES OF BIOREACTORS
Various bioreactor designs have been developed for a wide range of crops, culture types
and stages. Functionally, plant culture bioreactors can be divided into two broad types: those
in which the cultures are immersed partially or temporarily in the medium, and those in which
the cultures are continuously submerged. The latter are usually used for high-density
multiplication of cultures where submersion does not result in abnormal plant development.
Such cultures include protocorm-like bodies, embryogenic callus, somatic embryos, meristem
clusters and nodules. Protocorm-like bodies are meristematic tissues that regenerate
propagules. Meristem clusters and nodules are organogenic culture made up of compact
masses of meristems without significant leaf, stem or root development. Submerged
bioreactors can also be used for the development of small bulbs or corms for field growing
(Takayma, 1991).
Partial immersion type
There are several types of partial immersion bioreactors. These include gaseous phase
bioreactors, liquid layer bioreactors and temporary immersion bioreactors. Such designs are
preferred to culture plant material sensitive to hyperhydricity (Ziv, 1999; 2000). In gaseous
phase bioreactors, the cultures are mechanically supported on a porous base and intermittently
sprayed with medium (Ushiyama, 1988) or exposed to a nutrient mist (Weathers et al., 1988).
Excess medium is collected in the vessel and re-circulated. In such bioreactors the vessels are
fabricated from autoclavable clear glass or plastic, and the environment of the growth room
controls illumination and temperature. These bioreactors can provide excellent growth and
development for most tissue and organ cultures. However the mist generation systems
available are complex to maintain.
In liquid layer bioreactors, only the base of cultures is exposed to the medium. The
control of illumination, temperature and the gaseous environment is much the same as in
standard tissue culture vessels. The ‘LifeRaft’ TM, a simple liquid layer system, consists of a
disposable (or a reusable) microporous membrane raft supported by a buoyant float (reusable,
autoclavable) at the surface of the liquid medium (Osmotek, 2002). Stationary support
systems for liquid layer bioreactors have been also developed from sealed clear plastic film
with a wire frame (Takayma, 1991). Small bags made of plastic film are also being used
instead of vessels in commercial laboratories.
In temporary immersion bioreactors, the cultures are immersed in the medium, for a
preset duration at specified intervals. Their construction and operation is very simple, which
makes them attractive low cost alternatives. A typical design, uses two vessels (plastic or
glass) of which one holds the liquid medium and the other the cultures. Another version of
temporary immersion bioreactors includes a system where a single vessel with a reservoir on
one side mechanically tilted at preset intervals (Adelberg and Simpson, 2002). In this manner,

48

medium periodically bathes the cultures in the vessel (Fig. 1) and maintains the propagules in
a vertical position.
Other temporary immersion bioreactors use different designed vessels and rotation. As
the vessel turns, the culture is intermittently dipped in the medium. Temporary immersion
bioreactors are simple and cost effective to run. Consequently, a number of commercial
micropropagation laboratories have begun to integrate these systems into their production
procedures.

Fig.1. Rectangular vessels with intermittent cycle of wetting and drying on tilted shelves.
Submerged type
There are basically two types of submerged bioreactors - mechanically agitated, and airdriven. Mechanically agitated bioreactors make use of devices such as propellers, turbines,
impellers, paddles, and vibratory mixers to circulate the medium. Each device creates a
somewhat different pattern of fluid flow in the vessel (Preil, 1991), For each type of culture
and plant, the shear force and pattern of flow must be optimized. For example, it is
advantageous to have sufficient shear force to maintain meristematic clusters as small
aggregates. This minimizes stagnant regions in the vessel, which can cause cultures to stick to
surfaces and form clogs that disrupt medium flow. On the other hand, high shear force can
produce excessive foaming, and has a negative effect on culture growth. Such a system (e.g.
NLH bioreactor) for cell and embryo culture has recently been reported (Hvoslef-Eide, 2001).
Air-driven bioreactors are the simplest submerged bioreactor. In air-driven bioreactors,
filter-sterilized air is forced into the vessel’s bottom, and aerates and agitates the medium,
thereby, lifting and circulating the culture (Merchuk, 1990). Such air-driven bioreactors are
called simple aeration or bubble column bioreactors, depending on their volume. Air-driven
bioreactor vessels are usually fabricated from transparent or translucent materials, but are
typically formed from autoclavable clear glass or plastic and fittings. Alternatively, they are
made of non-autoclavable clear flexible plastic, and sterilized with gamma radiation
(Osmotek 2002). The simple airlift or bubble column bioreactors are easy and cost efficient to
run. The greatest advantage of submerged bioreactors is that they can be integrated into
automated or mechanized micropropagation systems (Levin et al., 1988; Levin et al., 1997).
In the automated systems, culture from the bioreactor is pumped to a bioprocessor for
separating, sizing and distributing the culture to vessels for propagule development. In the
mechanized system, an operator transfers the multiplied culture to a mechanical cutting device
for separation and then to a vessel for propagule development.

49

ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
The advantages of bioreactors include increased culture multiplication rate, faster
culture growth, reduction in medium cost and reduction in energy, labor and laboratory space.
The increased rate of multiplication and growth primarily reflects the effect of liquid medium
(Levin et al., 1997). The elimination of gelling agents (e.g. agar) reduces medium cost, and
filter sterilization of the medium eliminates the need for autoclaving. In bioreactors, the
culture density in liquid media is much higher than in the conventional vessels with semisolid
media. The conventional tissue culture vessels are typically kept on shelves with a large space
between the shelves. The use of bioreactors requires much smaller space in the growth room,
fewer clean work stations, and less space for media preparation, vessel storage and washing
than that used in the conventional micropropagation. The smaller size of the laboratory and
the number of people reduce air-conditioning needs, hence energy costs. Reduced
requirements for lighting the bioreactors and autoclaving, and less labor, simplification of
medium preparation, washing of vessels, and simplified handling of the cultures, all lead to
cost reduction.
There are, however, many disadvantages because of a number of problems associated
with the use of bioreactors in micropropagation. These include contamination, lack of
protocols and production procedures, increased hyperhydricity, and problems of foaming,
shear stress and release of growth inhibiting compounds by the cultures. Unfortunately,
culture contamination, which is a major problem in conventional commercial
micropropagation (Leifert and Waites, 1990; Leifert and Woodward, 1998; Leifert, 2000), is
even more acute in bioreactors. In conventional micropropagation, discarding a small number
of the contaminated vessels is an acceptable loss; in bioreactors, even a single contaminated
unit is a huge loss. However, despite these difficulties, a number of commercial laboratories
have developed effective procedures to control contamination in bioreactors.
CONTROL OF CONTAMINATION
Prevention of contamination in bioreactors requires a proper handling of the plant
material, of equipment during transfers, and cultures during production. Only the surface
sterilized explants, multiplied in small vessels and indexed for freedom from diseases are used
to initiate cultures in bioreactors. If the bioreactor is small, it is sterilized in an autoclavable
plastic bag, sealed with a cotton wool plug, and opened only under the laminar flow cabinet.
If the bioreactor is large, other methods to protect the vessel after autoclaving and during its
transport to the sterile area must be provided. The vessel is assembled under laminar flow,
taking care that non-sterile objects do not enter the sterile air stream in the vicinity of open
ports. After inoculation, all the ports are sealed and the bioreactor is brought to the growth
room and connected to an air supply. For harvesting, the bioreactor is returned to the sterile
area, and the ports are opened so that the air stream cannot carry contamination from the
outside. If proper procedures are followed, the reactor can be reused without re-sterilization.
Despite the precautions taken in initiating cultures, bioreactors can become
contaminated from the environment or from microbes, latent in the culture (Cf. Chapter 1 and
9). The contamination can be controlled with one or a combination of anti-microbial
compounds, acidification of the media, and micro-filtration of the medium. Several
commercial laboratories use anti-microbial compounds, such as PPM, G-1 (2-(5-bromo-furil)1-bromo-1-nitroethane), a fungicidal and bactericidal chemical, sodium hypochlorite or
sodium dichloroisocyanurate,. Acidification of the medium (pH 3) has been used to control
contamination in the multiplication of banana and in media for other crops (Leifert et al.,

50

1994). Contamination can also be controlled by circulation of the medium through a 0.2µ
microporous filter (Levin et al., 1996). However, the removal of contaminants needs frequent
filter changes, which is too expensive for use in a commercial laboratory. Chilling the filter
retards filter clogging significantly.
CONSTRUCTION OF A SIMPLE BIOREACTOR
For laboratories with limited resources, a simple temporary immersion bioreactor can be
constructed of autoclavable glass or plastic vessels or bags with a wide (at least 5 cm
diameter) mouth and a tight fitting rubber stopper. It is better to use small vessels, of one liter
or less. The stopper should have two holes for glass tubing. One tube is inserted and fixed in
the stopper so that when the vessel is closed, the end of the tube is closer to the bottom of the
vessel. A second tube is inserted and fixed in the stopper so that the end of this tube is near
the top of the vessel when it is closed. The tubes can be fixed with a heat resistant silicone
sealer, such as that used for repair of car radiators. The vessel should have at least one port (510cm diameter) to add or remove cultures, and the port should be sealed with a rubber stopper
or a metal closure with a rubber gasket. There are four ports, two for air-inlet and -outlet, and
two for medium-inlet and -outlet. The air-inlet and -outlet ports are connected to hydrophobic
Teflon submicron microporous air filters, which must be kept dry. The wet filters clog and
may lead to contamination. It should be possible to open and close, connect and disconnect
medium ports without leakage to prevent entry of contaminants. The bioreactors should fit
under the laminar flow unit leaving enough space on the top and sides to allow easy access to
the vessel for handling cultures and changing the medium.
The purpose built bioreactors are either air-driven or temporary immersion type. A
reservoir vessel similar to the culture vessel is prepared except that the mouth of the vessel is
just wide enough to fix the two glass tubes. The tops of the tubes, that reach the base of the
culture vessel, are connected to each other with silicone tubing. For both the reservoir and
culture vessel, the ends of the short tubes above the stopper are connected to sterilizing filters
such as ‘Acro 50’ filters (Pall Filter Corp. USA) with a short length of silicone tubing.
Prior to use, the bioreactor is assembled with the stoppers loosely fitted into the vessels
and placed in an autoclavable bag with a cotton wool plug. The culture vessel can also contain
an autoclavable plastic or stainless steel mesh screen to support the culture above the medium
in the vessel. The bioreactor is then autoclaved and placed on the laminar flow bench. The
culture is aseptically introduced into the vessel and sterile medium in the reservoir, and the
stoppers are tightly closed. If necessary, the part where the stoppers fit into the vessels is
taped shut to prevent contamination. The bioreactor is then placed in the growth room, the
two vessels are placed alongside each other, and the reservoir air filter is connected to a 6W
aquarium pump with silicone tubing. Air is pumped into the reservoir vessel, forcing the
medium into the culture vessel. The medium is allowed to remain in the culture vessel for a
short duration and the air pump is then connected to the culture vessel air filter, and the
medium is pumped back into the reservoir. This process is repeated at preset intervals, and
can be automated.A simple bubble reactor has also been described parts of which can be
purchased as a kit (Ziv and Hadar, 1991; Ziv et al., 1998; Osmotek, 2002).
COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS
A recent study has shown that bioreactors can significantly reduce the production cost
of micropropagation in developed countries, from $0.16 to $0.07-$0.08 per unit (Gross and
Levin, 1999). This has recently been confirmed in commercial laboratories. For example, a

51

major ornamental plant producer in the US is now propagating 40,000 units per month based
on bioreactor multiplication and mechanical culture separation. The cost reduction (Tables 13) is based on three situations. Model 1 is a conventional laboratory producing 20 million
units per year. Model 2 is a laboratory using multiplication in bioreactors, mechanical
separation of the culture and elongation on semi-solid medium. Model 3 is a laboratory using
multiplication in bioreactors, mechanical separation of the culture and elongation in
temporary immersion bioreactors (Gross and Levin, 1999).
It is, however, unclear whether bioreactors will produce a commercially relevant cost
reduction in developing countries. In countries, such as India, labor cost can be as low as US
$0.20-0.60 per hour (Savangikar, 2002). Based on projections of Model 1 above, this would
mean that in a developing country, a conventional laboratory with 20X106 units per year
capacity could produce propagules at $0.06-$0.07/unit. This projection agrees with the
available information on commercial laboratories in India with 6-10 million units capacity per
year, and production costs of $0.06-$0.14/unit (Barathi, 2002). For larger laboratories,
bioreactor micropropagation could probably further reduce this cost by about $0.01. In
addition, bioreactor micropropagation would simplify production management through the
use of large culture batches and reduced labor. Although cost savings alone might not justify
the integration of the bioreactors into production, the simplification of production procedures
and management might make bioreactor-based micropropagation desirable for large-scale
micropropagation concerns.
Table 1. Estimated annual cost (US$) of major investment for the laboratory
Annual Annual Annual
cost of
labor
interest
%
building cost
Model 1 2696000 20
4
140190 2163600
Model 2 2059000 20
4
107070 634800
Model 3 1641000 20
4
85332
530400
Savings from Model 1-2 = 65%; from Model 1-3 = 73%
Building Amortiz
Building Costs
e Years

Annual
energy
cost
209160
1374520
48960

Total Annual
cost
2512950
879390
664683

Table 2. Estimated annual cost (US$) of major equipment and furniture for the laboratory
Equipment
cost
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3

Furniture
cost
1000000
100000
100000

Amortize
years
300000
30000
30000

Annual
interest %
10
10
10

Total
annual cost
4
4
4

135200
135200
135200

Table 3. Annual cost of production (US$) for each model (20X106 units/year)

Model 1
Model2
Model 3

Total
Cost
(A)
2512950
879390
664683

A =Table 1. B= Table 2.

52

Total
cost
(B)
135200
135200
135200

Costs
per unit
0.13
0.05
0.04

Unit
cost
media
0.01
0.01
0.01

Unit
cost
vessels
0.01
0.01
0.01

Unit
cost
misc.
0.01
0.01
0.01

Total unit
cost
0.16
0.08
0.07

As stated before (Cf. Chapters 4 and 5), the elimination of agar and the use of natural
light in the growth room can produce a 90% reduction in resource costs (Kodym and Zapata,
2001). Similarly, the use of natural light in combination with the use of liquid media can
result in over a 90% reduction in the cost production in India (Cf. Chapter 4). If the adoption
of such technologies brings down the cost of production in developing countries, the cost
reduction from bioreactor micropropagation would be indeed small. However, the
simplification of production management could still make bioreactor micropropagation
worthwhile for the large-scale laboratories. Most laboratories in India (70%) produce less than
1 million units per year (Mascarenhas, 1999). It is likely that this also reflects the situation in
many other developing countries. Since the use of bioreactors will not produce a large cost
reduction or greatly increase efficiency of small laboratories, the integration of bioreactors
into production systems should only be attempted by facilities with skilled and experienced
propagators.
REFERENCES
Adelberg, J.W. and Simpson, E.P. 2002. Intermittent Immersion Vessel Apparatus and
Process for Plant Propagation. Internl. S/N: PCT/US01/06586.
Barathi, N. 2002. Plant TC listserv. www.agro.agri.umn.edu/plant-tc/listserv/
Etienne, E., Teisson, C., Alavard, D., Lartaud, M., Berthouly, M., Georget, F., Escalona, M.
and Lorenzo, J.C. 1999. Temporary immersion for plant tissue culture. In: Plant
Biotechnology and In Vitro Biology in the 21stCentury. (Eds. Altman, A., Ziv, M. and
Izhar, S.). Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp. 633-636.
Gross, A. and Levin, R. 1999. Design considerations for a mechanised micropropagation
laboratory. In: Plant Biotechnology and In Vitro Biology in the 21stCentury. A. Altman,
M. Ziv and S. Izhar (Eds.) Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp 633- 636.
Hvoslef-Eide, T. 2001. Challenges in scaling-up and automation in micropropagation. 1st
Internl. Symp. Acclimatization and Establishment of Micropropagated Plants. Sani
Halkidiki, Greece
Kodym, A. and Zapata-Arias F.J. 2001. Low-cost alternatives for the micropropagation of
banana. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 66: 67-71.
Leifert, C. and Waites, W.M. 1990. Contaminants of plan tissue culture. Internl. Assoc. Plant
Tiss. Cult. Newsl. 60: 2-13.
Leifert, C., Waites, B., Keetley, J.W., Wright, S.M., Nicholas, J.R. and Waites, W.M. 1994.
Effect of medium acidification on filamentous fungi, yeasts and bacterial contaminants
in Delphinium tissue cultures. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 36:149-155.
Leifert, C. and Woodward, S. 1998. Laboratory contamination management: the requirement
for microbiological quality assurance. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 52: 83-88.
Leifert, C. 2000. Quality Assurance Systems for Plant Cell and Tissue Culture: The problem
of Latent Persistance of Bacterial Pathogens and Agrobacterium Transformed vector
systems. In. Proc. Intl. Symp. Methods and Markers For Quality Assurance in
Micropropagation. A.C. Cassells et al. (Eds.) Acta. Hort. Pp. 530.
Levin, R., Gaba, V., Tal, B, Hirsh, S., DeNola, D. and Vasil, I.K. 1988. Automated plant
tissue culture for mass propagation. Bio/Technology 6: 1035-1040.
Levin, R., Stav, R., Alper Y. and Watad, A.A. 1996. In vitro multiplication in liquid culture of
Syngonium contaminated with Bacillus spp. and Rathayibacter tritci. Plant Cell Tiss.
Org. Cult. 45: 277-280.
Levin, R., Alper, Y., Stav, R. and Watad, A.A. 1997. Methods and apparatus for liquid media
and semi automated micropropagation. Acta Hort. 447: 659- 663.

53

Mascarenhas, A.F. 1999. Scope of the tissue culture industry in India. In: Plant Biotechnology
and In Vitro Biology in the 21stCentury. Altman, A., Ziv, M. and Izhar, S. (Eds.)
Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.713-720.
Merchuk, J.C. 1990. Why use airlift bioreactors? Trends in Biotechnology 8: 66-71.
Osmotek. 2002. Bioreactor multiplication. www.Osmotek.com
Preil, W. 1991. Application of bioreactors in plant propagation. In: Micropropagation:
Technology and Application. Debergh, P.C. and Zimmerman, R.H. (Eds.) Kluwer Acad.
Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.425-455.
Savangikar, V.A. 2002. Plant tissue culture for entrepreneurs, business houses, farmers and
nurserymen and natural/herbal products. www.tissuecon.com
Takayama, S. 1991. Automated propagation of microbulbs of lilies. In: Scale-up and
Automation in Plant Propagation. Vasil, I.K. (Ed.) Acad. Press, USA. Pp.111-131.
Takayama, S. and Akita, M. 1994. The types of bioreactors used for shoots and embryos.
Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 39: 147-156.
Ushiyama, K. 1988. Large scale culture techniques of plant cells the secondary metabolite
production. Hakko to Kogyo 46: 7-11.
Weathers, P.J., Cheetham, R.D. and Giles, K.L. 1988. Dramatic increases in shoot number
and length for Musa, Cordyline, and Nephrylepsis using nutrient mists. Acta. Hort. 230:
39-44.
Ziv, M. and Hadar, A. 1991. Morphogenic pattern of Nephrolepsis exalta cv. Bostoniensis in
agar or liquid culture: implications for micropropagation. Israel J. of Bot. 40: 7-16.
Ziv, M., Ronen, G., and Raviv, M. 1998. Proliferation of meristemic clusters in disposable
presterilized plastic bioreactors for the large scale micropropagation of plants. In Vitro
Cell. Dev. Biol. – Plant 34: 152-158.
Ziv, M. 1999. Organogenic plant regeneration in bioreactors. In: Plant Biotechnology and In
Vitro Biology in the 21stCentury. Altman, A., Ziv, M. and Izhar, S. (Eds.) Kluwer
Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.673- 676.
Ziv, M. 2000. Bioreactor technology for plant micropropagation. Hort. Rev. 24: 1-30.

54

DISEASE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
J. SCHMIDT, E. WILHEM
Austrian Research Center,
Seibersdorf, Austria
V.A. SAVANGIKAR
Nashik, India
Abstract. In micropropagation, the health status of the donor mother plant and of the plants multiplied
from it are among the most critical factors, which determine the success of a tissue culture operation.
The indexing of the mother plants for freedom from viral, bacterial, and fungal diseases is a normal
procedure in large-scale plant propagation through tissue culture. Plants not originating from
pathogen-tested material must be screened for the presence of viruses Laboratories, which do not have
in-house facilities to carry out plant indexing, should obtain their indexed stock plants from
organizations such as Departments of Agriculture, agricultural universities or privately owned certified
germplasm repositories that routinely produce such plant material. Batches of micropropagated plants
should be tested for freedom from diseases either in-house or by other laboratories. ELISA has been
the most effective method for virus and pathogen detection in plants. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
and nucleic acid hybridization are more sensitive than ELISA, and can detect pathogens in extremely
low amounts. The elimination of most viruses can be achieved by a combination of apical meristem
culture and thermotherapy.

INTRODUCTION
The health status of the donor mother plant and of the plants multiplied from it are
among the most critical factors, which determine the success of a tissue culture operation.
Hence, indexing of the mother plants for freedom from viral, bacterial, and fungal diseases is
a normal procedure before undertaking propagation in large-scale plant propagation through
tissue culture. Laboratories, which do not have in-house facilities to carry out plant indexing,
should obtain their indexed stock plants from organizations such as Departments of
Agriculture, Agricultural Universities or privately owned certified germplasm repositories
that routinely produce such plant material. Batches of micropropagated plants should be tested
for freedom from diseases either in-house or by other laboratories.
BACTERIAL AND FUNGAL CONTAMINATION
While most of the fungal and bacterial diseases are eliminated during surface
sterilization and culture, viruses and viroids survive through successive multiplication if the
mother plant is infected (Sessitsch et al., 2002). Even cultures from seeds may carry viroids
and bacterial endophytes, in certain cases also viruses. Bacteria may be controlled under in
vitro conditions to some extent using certain bacteriostatic agents. Nevertheless, such
chemical treatments with e.g. ‘plant protection mixture’ (ppm) or commercial antibiotics even
when applied on long term do not fully eliminate microorganisms.
VIRUS INFECTION IN PLANTS
Viruses are obligate parasites, and for their multiplication, they use the metabolic
machinery of the cells, and inhibit plant growth. Although, many viruses do not produce
disease symptoms, they adversely affect plant metabolism and increase progressively with
repeated vegetative propagation (Wang and Hu, 1980). Most viruses infect only a limited

55

number of species, but a few have a wide host range (Mathews, 1991). Many plant viruses are
transmitted through vectors such as insects, nematodes, bacteria, and fungi. Propagation from
vegetative parts, grafting and sap can transmit viruses from one plant to another. The damage
from viruses depends on their concentration in the tissues and spread within the plants. The
greater the concentration of the virus, the greater the debilitating effect observed on plant
growth. Many varieties of vegetatively propagated crops decline in performance with viral
accumulation and must be discarded. Even though the viruses do not produce visible
symptoms, the plants have reduced yield and poor quality. The removal of specific viruses by
meristem-tip culture has been reported to lead to a dramatic yield increase (Murashige, 1980)
and rejuvenation of plant varieties that are vegetatively propagated. This is a unique
contribution of meristem-culture not achievable by any other techniques.
Detection of viral diseases
Plants not originating from pathogen-tested material must be screened for the presence
of viruses. Procedures to detect the presence of viruses include visual examination for viral
symptoms, infection tests on indicator plants, serological tests, electron microscopy, and
direct detection of RNA using molecular techniques. Internationally approved and recognized
detection systems include serological and molecular laboratory assays, and indicator hosts in
the greenhouse.
Indexing with indicator plants
Prior to the advent of antigen-antibody reaction detection systems, the earlier method of
detecting virus relied upon indicator plants. For example, in potato, viruses A, X, and Y can
be detected by rubbing the juice of the infected plant on the leaves of indicator plants such as
Chenopodium spp., and Nicotiana spp. The development of necrotic spots on the leaves is a
typical symptom indicating the presence of the viruses. For example in sweet potato, its wild
relative, Brazilian Morning Glory (Ipomaea setosa) is still used as the indicator host
(Anonymous, 2002). Similarly, in many fruit trees, the appropriate rootstocks are used for
indexing of various virus strains (NRSP, 1999; Arthofer, 2001). The detection of plant
diseases has changed radically in the last 20 years. A number of indicator plant based tests
have been replaced with specific Enzyme Linked Immuno Sorbent Assays (ELISA).
Nevertheless, indexing with indicator plants is a low cost and highly effective method to
detect many viruses.
ELISA test
ELISA has been the most effective method for virus and pathogen detection in plants.
Each virus has a unique protein coat. Hence they can be detected by using antibodies, which
are usually linked to enzymes for reporting the affinity binding via colour signal from the
used enzyme substrate. The double antibody sandwich (DAS) method in a 96-well microtitre
plate (Clark and Adams, 1977) is still widely used. Various alternative formats, substrates,
and antibody binding modifications have been developed over the years to increase specific
sensitivity (Agdia, 2002; Bioreba, 2002). The most common method nowadays uses
“biotinylated” virus-specific antibodies to improve their affinity to the respective virus surface
thus improving the signal. The use of monoclonal antibodies has been so far restricted to
certain potato and barley viruses, because of their high cost and inability to detect the range of
strains in several diseases.

56

Large scale testing based on screen-spot samples is also a routine procedure. Such dotimmuno-binding assays are versatile and cheaper alternatives to microtitre plate tests. Plant
sap is directly spotted onto a pre-treated microporous membrane (e.g. nitro-cellulose or
polyvinylidene difluoride). The test kits can be used directly in the field. Sample membranes
can be dried and shipped to another laboratory for processing. However, such systems are not
useful for viruses present in low concentrations in the plant sap.
ELISA has several limitations. First of all, a test is specific only to a given strain of the
pathogen. For a large group of ubiquitous viruses, which do not produce disease symptoms or
fatal consequences, ELISA kits have not been developed. Thus, the strain specificity has
severe limitations for comprehensive quality control. Further, ELISA is less sensitive than
PCR, and may fail to detect low amounts the virus in tissue-cultured plants. Whereas a
positive ELISA is a good indicator of the existence of microbes (but false positives may also
occur), a negative test does not ensure their absence. The use of Immuno-Tissue-Printing
allows the localization of viruses in tissues and therefore the improvement of elimination
strategies in vitro by visualizing the result of virus removal (Fitch et al., 2001).
Polymerase Chain Reaction
The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) is more sensitive than ELISA, and can detect
pathogens in extremely low amounts. PCR detects pathogens from their genetic material, i.e.
DNA or RNA. This technique uses a specific enzyme and the respective genomic start code
for a relevant section of the pathogen-DNA to reproduce millions of copies from it. Therefore,
even minute quantities of the pathogen DNA can be detected. Since most plant viruses are
made of only RNA, first a DNA copy of the RNA is made, whereas DNA from bacteria and
phytoplasmas may be amplified directly. Because the genetic material of the pathogen is
mixed with that of the plant, it is necessary to target only the genetic material to be copied.
This is done by adding small pieces of DNA called primers which stick only to borders of the
region of genetic material that need to be copied. The primers then direct the enzyme where to
start and end amplification.
During PCR, the DNA is subjected to a series of hot, cold, and warm cycles in a
thermocycler. Hot cycles split DNA into single strands. Cold cycles allow the primers to
attach to the DNA. During warm cycles, the enzyme makes a copy of each piece of primed
DNA. If a phytoplasma is present, PCR produces a large quantity of a specific piece of DNA.
By using gel electrophoresis, DNA pieces are separated in size, and the specific piece of DNA
is identified. If the critical concentration of a DNA particle is sufficiently low and the sample
tests negative, the plant material can be regarded as practically free of the target microbe.
Once a test is standardized with an appropriate primer, and by a method, which excludes
inhibitors, a negative PCR test is a more reliable indicator of practical freeness. The use of
PCR drastically reduces the number of samples, which test negative although they may carry
the virus. Once proper probes are developed, the nylon membrane spot test is a practical,
rapid and accurate method for diagnosis. PCR has the advantage that by determining
“degenerate primers”, a fairly large group of microbes such as viruses, bacteria and fungi can
be detected.
Nucleic acid Hybridization test
The presence of viruses can be detected from isolation and characterization of double
stranded RNA (ds-RNA) produced in most plants during viral replication. Although nonspecific presence of ds-RNA in a sample extract strongly suggests viral infection, for further
identification of the virus, the test has to be verified by serological and other methods.

57

Viroids are much smaller than viruses, and are made of a circular piece of RNA and do
not have a coat protein. Viroids such as ‘Potato Spindle Tuber Viroid’ can be detected by
nucleic acid hybridization. The RNA of the virus "hybridizes" with probe RNA. When the
two single strands come together, they form a double strand. To detect the viroid, RNA
extracted from plant tissue is attached to a microporous membrane. This bound RNA is then
detected by a “probe”, which is an RNA particle labeled with either 32P or a chemical called
DIG (digoxigenin). If a viroid is present, the probe hybridizes with it; if not, the probe is lost
when the membrane is washed. DIG bioluminescence or radioactivity if present on the
membrane can be detected on an exposed film. Samples from known healthy and known
infected plants are used as controls. Large scale testing on nylon screen-based spot samples is
also a routine procedure.
Elimination of viruses
The elimination of viruses can be achieved by a combination of apical meristem culture
and thermotherapy. Meristem culture is the most commonly used method to free plants from
virus diseases. This should not be confused with shoot tip culture as explained before (Cf.
Chapter 1). Virus-free plants have been obtained by thermo-therapy and meristem culture in
several species (Morel and Martin, 1952; Belkengren and Miller, 1962; Mullin et al., 1974;
Boxus, 1976).
The plant meristem is a zone of cells with intense divisions, situated in the growing tip
of stems and roots. The virus travels through the plant vascular system, which is absent in the
meristem. Moreover the cell-to-cell movement of the viruses through plasmodesmata cannot
keep up with the growth and elongation of the apical-tip. The high metabolic activity of
meristematic cells, usually accompanied by an elevated endogenous auxin content in shoot
apices may also inhibit virus replication. Thus, the meristem is highly protected from
infection (Limasset et al., 1949). Based on this finding, meristem culture has been extensively
used to eliminate viruses, bacteria and fungi from plants. The culture of meristems or
alternatively small shoot tips, in combination with enhanced cell division in vitro and/or
thermal pre-treatment allows the elimination of viruses in plants propagated from vegetative
parts. If explants are too big, they are likely to contain virus particles in the associated
vascular tissue.
For thermotherapy, the plants are first are grown at high temperature (ca. 38-420 C) for
4-6 weeks. Under tropical or subtropical conditions, this can be accomplished simply by
installing a small compartment of a glasshouse equipped with a roof vent on one end and an
exhaust fan on the opposite end, both temperature-regulated. This approach removes the
excess heat and provides a constant high temperature daytime treatment. In climates with
temperate conditions, the same effect can be achieved by placing fluorescent lights including
ballasts and/or heat producing incandescent lamps in the necessary minimum distance to
avoid damage over the plants to be treated in a dark box just large enough to include the
plants. Such a system has been used for virus elimination in sweet potato (Schmidt and
Grahsl, unpublished).
After thermotherapy, 0.2 –0.4 mm explants are preferentially cultured singly in test
tubes. If the explant is too big, it likely has a vascular system that may contain microbial
contaminants including viruses. The plants thus obtained are multiplied, and re-indexed. A
better strategy is to culture 2-5mm long explants for 4-5 weeks, maintain the in vitro grown
plant at high temperature for 4-5 weeks, and excise 0.2-0.4mm or even longer explants to
initiate subcultures. This procedure avoids in vivo contamination problems and gives high

58

survival and multiplication rate. In potato, in vitro cultures were established from several
millimeter long shoot tips and axillary buds after in vitro thermotherapy to free potato from all
relevant virus diseases (Schmidt and Grahsl, unpublished). By using this method, it was
possible to eradicate viruses A, Y and X from potato varieties in one single step (Ahloowalia,
unpublished). A method called multiple lateral shoot technique of in vitro elimination of three
common viruses, X, Y and S of potato, has been also reported (Zapata et al., 1995). In this
method, a stem with at least five nodes is treated with ribavirin in liquid medium, and cultured
for 5 days at room temperature. The stems are subjected to thermotherapy at 32-350 C for 25
days, apical buds are taken from the lateral shoots cultured on solid medium, and checked for
virus infection with ELISA. The survival of explants in relation to the applied temperature
stress and their size is always inversely proportional to the pathogen elimination success.
It is known from molecular and traditional microbiological surveys that effectively all in
vitro plants contain certain microorganisms, mostly bacteria but also mycoplasmas, viroids,
and fungi, many of which cannot be cultured without the host. Such microorganisms may not
show symptoms, and in some cases may even have a positive effect on the growth
performance of the host plant (Bell et al., 1995, Bensalim et al., 1998, Boddey et al., 1995,
Cassells, 1997).
Shoot-tip culture is used for the multiplication of plants that are already freed from
known diseases. It should be emphasized that it does not free the plant from viruses. In fact, it
favors propagation of viruses and increases virus concentration in the daughter plants. In
many ornamentals, variegation is due to the presence of certain viruses or mycoplasms (Lee et
al., 1997). The removal of such viruses is therefore not desirable. In such ornamental plants,
multiplication from shoot-tip and axillary bud culture is the better choice, because meristem
culture may remove the virus, and the ornamental variegation is lost (Cassells et al., 1980). In
certain varieties with variegations as in Petunia and Pelargonium meristem culture may
dissolve the existing chimera, thus producing material without the desired character. Viruses
may also produce certain phenotypes that are characteristic of a plant variety. For example, in
sugarcane cv. ‘Co 740’, the yellow irregular leaf streaks were initially considered as a
diagnostic character till they were proven to be disease symptoms. The removal of the virus
by meristem-tip culture led to the disappearance of the yellow streaks, which reappeared on
re-infection (Hendre et al., 1975). Erroneously, the yellow streaks are still recognized as a
varietal diagnostic trait of ‘Co 740’. Recently, endogenous para-retroviruses have been
reported that integrate in the genome of the plant material (Harper et al. 1999). Under in vitro
stress, sequences of such viruses have been detected in the micropropagated banana plants.
Perspective of disease freeness
Despite the fact that many viruses may not show visible symptoms, their presence can
reduce the yield and quality of crops. Yield increases of up to 300% were reported following
replacement of virus-infected stock with specific pathogen-free plants (Murashige, 1980). In
China, yield losses from virus diseases of sweet potato (Feathery Mottle Virus, SPFMV,
Latent Virus, SPLV and Caulimo-Like Virus, SPCLV) used to be as much as 20%. After the
establishment of a virus elimination program, within a few years almost 10% area of 6.6
million ha under sweet potato is now planted with virus-free planting material (Gao et al.,
2000).
There are no chemicals to cure virus-infected plants in the field. However, some less
virulent viruses can protect plants from infection of their more virulent strains and create
cross protection (Jones and Mullin, 1974). The phenomenon of cross protection need not

59

prevent the use of meristem culture. Under field conditions a crop does not stay absolutely
virus free even though derived from tissue culture material. Even under tissue culture, total
freeness may not be achieved.
Many symbiotic organisms contribute to the vigor and ability of the tissue-cultured
plants to perform well in the field (Cf. Chapter 9). In the course of tissue culture, many plants
are made free from such beneficial microbes, e.g. symbiotic nitrogen fixing endophytic
bacteria, and mycorrhizae. There is no practical way to retain the beneficial microorganisms
during tissue culture. The deliberate re-infection of propagules with selected strains can be a
valid way of retrieving the benefits of such microbes (Cf. Chapter 9).
REFERENCES
Agdia, 2002. Easy-to-use test kits, reagents and laboratory testing services for agricultural
diagnostics. www.agdia.com
Anonymous. 2002. Sweet potato custom testing, treatment and maintenance services. Univ.
California, Davis, CA, USA
http://fpms.ucdavis.edu/sweetpotato/CustomService.html
Arthofer, W. 2001. Pathogen detection. IAM, BOKU, Austria
http://www.boku.ac.at/iam/pbiotech/phytopath/det.html#indx).
Belkengren, R.O. and Miller, P.W. 1962. Culture of apical meristems of Fragaria vesca
strawberry plants as a method of excluding latent A virus. Plant Disease Rep. 46: 119121.
Bell, C.R., Dickie, G.A, Harvey, W.L.G. and Chan, J.W.Y.F. 1995. Endophytic bacteria in
grape vine. Can. J. Microbiol. 41: 46-53.
Bensalim, S., Nowak, J. and Asiedu, S.K. 1998. A plant growth promoting Rhizobacterium
and temperature effects on performance of 18 clones of potato. Amer. J. Potato Res. 75:
145-152.
Bioreba. 2002. Your partner in agro-diagonostics. www.bioreba.com
Boddey, R.M., Oliveira de, O.C., Urquiaga, S., Reis, V.M., Olivares de, F.L., Baldani, V.L.D.
and Döbereiner, J. 1995. Biological nitrogen fixation associated with sugar cane and
rice: Contributions and prospects for improvement. Plant and Soil 174: 195-209.
Boxus, P. 1976. Rapid production of virus-free strawberry by in vitro culture. Acta Hotic.66:
35-38.
Cassells, A.C. 1997. Pathogen and Microbial Contamination Management in
Micropropagation. Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht.
Cassells, A.C., Minas, G. and Long, R. 1980. Culture of Pelargonium hybrids from meristems
and explants: Chimeral and beneficially-infected varieties. In: Tissue Culture Methods
for Plant Pathologists. Ingram, D.S. and Helgeson, J.P. (Eds.) Blackwell Scientific Pub.
Oxford. Pp.125-130.
Clark M.F., and Adams A.N. 1977. Characteristics of the microplate method of enzymelinked immunosorbent assay for the detection of plant viruses. J. Gen. Virol. 34: 475483.
Fitch, M.M.M., Lehrer, A.T., Komor, E. and Moore, P.H. 2001. Elimination of sugarcane
yellow leaf virus from infected sugarcane plants by meristem tip culture visualized by
tissue blot immunoassay. Plant Pathology (in press)
Gao, F., Gong, Y. and Zhang, P. 2000. Production and deployment of virus-free sweet potato
in China. Crop Protection 19: 105-111.
Harper, G., Osuji, J.O., Heslop-Harrison, J.S. and Hull, R. 1999. Integration of banana streak
badna virus into the Musa genome: molecular and cytogenetic evidence. Virology 255:
207-213.

60

Hendre, R.R., Mascarenhas, A.F., Pathak, M., Nadgir, A.L. and Jagannathan, V. 1975.
Growth of virus free sugarcane plants from apical meristem. Indian Phytopathology, 28:
175-178.
Jones, E.D. and Mullin, J.M. 1974. The effect of potato virus X on susceptibility of potato
tubers to Fusarium roseum “Avenaceum”. Am. Potato J. 51: 209-251.
Lee, I.M., Klopmeyer, M., Bartoszyk, I.M., Gundersen-Rindal, D.E., Chou, T.S., Thomson
K.L. and Eisenreich, R. 1997. Phytoplasma induced free branching in commercial
poinsettia cultivars. Nature Bio/Technology 15:178-82.
Limasset, P., Cornuet, P. and Gendron, Y. 1949. Recherche du virus de la mosaïque du tabac
(Marmor tabaci Holmes) dans les organes aériens de tabac infectés. C.R. Acad. Sci.,
Paris, 228: 1888-1896.
Mathews, R.E.F. 1991. Plant Virology. Acad. Press, New York.
Morel, G. and Martin, C. 1952. Virus-free Dahlia through meristem culture. C. R. Hebd.
Seances Acad. Sci. Paris 235: 1324-1325.
Mullin, R.H., Smith, S.H., Frazier, N.W., Schlegel, D.E. and McCall, S.R. 1974. Meristem
culture frees strawberries of mild yellow edge, pallidosis and mottle diseases.
Phytopathalogy 64: 1425-1429.
Murashige, T. 1980. Plant growth substances in commercial uses of tissue culture. In: Plant
Growth Substances 1979. Skoog, F. (Ed.) Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Pp.426-434.
NRSP.
1999.
NRSP5
indexing
procedures.
Washington
State
Univ.
http://nrsp5.prosser.wsu.edu/nrsptest.html
Sessitsch, A., Reiter, B., Pfeifer, U. and Wilhelm, E. 2002. Cultivation-independent
population analysis of bacterial endophytes in three potato varieties based on eubacterial
and Actinomyces-specific PCR of 16rRNA genes. FEMS Microb. Ecol. 39: 23-32.
Wang, P.J. and Hu, N.Y. 1980. Regeneration of virus free plants through in-vitro culture. In:
Advances in Biochemical Engineering: Plant Cell Culture, II. Fiechter, A. (Ed.)
Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Pp.61-99.
Zapata, C., Miller Jr., J.C. and Smith, R.H. 1995. In vitro eradication of viruses from potato.
In vitro Cell Dev. Biol.-Plant. 31: 153-159.

61

QUALITY ASSURANCE
V.A. SAVANGIKAR, C. SAVANGIKAR
Nashik, India
Abstract. Quality checks are essential to assure production of high quality plants and to have endusers confidence. Quality standards require the establishment of suitable tests to maintain quality
control. The choice of explant source, freedom of the donor plant from viruses, disease causing fungi,
bacteria, viroids, phytoplasmas, vigour and conformity of the variety, and elimination of somaclonal
variants are critical for maintaining plant quality. Variety identification by proper labeling at all stages
is essential to ensure varietal identity.

INTRODUCTION
In many developing countries, there is a major need to provide large quantities of
improved planting material to growers and farmers. Since quality checks in many developing
countries do not exist beyond the laboratory gate, the assurance of high quality
micropropagated plants is critical to have end-users confidence. Quality assurance becomes
even more important when the plant material is for export. High quality of the super-elite and
elite micro- and mini-tubers of potato has improved the production of quality seed potatoes in
Ireland and Scotland where conventional multiplication had been inadequate to generate high
quality disease-free planting material. Cost reduction based on low cost options is necessary
for commercial micropropagation. While cost reduction is necessary for commercial
micropropagation, the low cost option should not compromise quality. The sturdiness of
plants is an important attribute of quality, which determines their ability to adapt to field
conditions. The cost-effective systems should produce semi-hardened plants in the culture
itself. Such plants produce a profuse and viable root system and adapt in less time to field
conditions.
Quality standards require the establishment of suitable tests to maintain quality control
and the assurance of micropropagated material irrespective of the system used. No industry
can prosper without a quality policy based on carefully identified, relevant and recognized
quality specifications and standard methods to test and verify them. Hence, the plants coming
out of any facility should be subjected to quality testing without discrimination or prejudice.
The commercial micropropagation industry, which is still in its infancy and early stages of
evolution in many developing countries, lacks this vitally important component. Under the
seed law, tissue culture plants are defined as “seed”. The specifications stipulated for seeds of
cultivated crop plants do not apply to tissue culture plants for quality, except for the basic
requirement of distinctiveness of the variety, genetic uniformity, and stability. This lack of
fundamental specification creates conflicting opinions on the quality of micropropagated
plants. Such a situation is undesirable for users, producers and regulating agencies and a
hindrance to the maturity and growth of commercial micropropagation as a vibrant industry.
Several commercial micropropagation laboratories already follow standard practices
such as labeling of cultures, use of indexed stock mother plants, and preventing secondary
infection from pathogens during the hardening phase. The quality considerations need to take
into account several parameters as a package. A comprehensive approach is needed, which
will help micropropagators to monitor production quality, and formulate a quality- assurance
system based on such tests and specifications, that are open to third party inspection. Such an

63

approach will also be useful to formulate well-defined quality specifications by regulatory
authorities.
Factors affecting quality
The explant source (e.g. meristem tip, axillary buds), freedom of the donor plant from
viruses, disease causing fungi, bacteria, viroids, phytoplasmas, vigour and conformity of the
variety, and elimination of somaclonal variants are critical for maintaining plant quality.
Many cultures are initiated from meristem-tip explants. Such cultures can be multiplied by
enhancing axillary branching, which preserve genetic stability even on indefinite subculturing
(Bhojwani and Razdan, 1983; Pierik, 1989). Since this method reduces the chance of
differentiation of plants from cells other than the meristematic tissue, the expected genetic
variation is low. However, the shoot-tip and bigger explant cultures have differentiated cells,
in addition to the undifferentiated meristematic cells, and may result in somaclonal variants.
Thus, shoot tip culture has a significant probability of producing genetic variants. However, in
banana, the frequency of such variants markedly differs with the variety. Shoot-tip explants
infected with endophytic microflora and viruses transmit them to daughter plants. Endophytic
microflora is not desirable, unless it has symbiotic functions. Hence, meristem culture is the
preferred method to initiate cultures for producing high quality plants.
Multiplication should be based on enhanced axillary bud proliferation, i.e. the rapid
formation of tiny microscopic axillary buds in the axils of the leaves of the tiny plants that
sprout and develop into daughter plants. The introduction of callus phase usually stimulated
with growth regulators such as 2,4-D will introduce unwanted somaclonal variation and
should be avoided during multiplication. For the same reason, the use of relatively high
concentrations of growth regulators such as BAP, IAA, & BA should be avoided. Quality
assurance begins with culture initiation, explant source, and judicious use of growth
regulators during multiplication. Cultures initiated from meristem tip and multiplied through
enhanced axillary branching avoid callus formation and give uniform clones. On the other
hand shoot-tip cultures are considered inferior to meristem-tip culture since they can be the
source of virus infection. In case of photoperiod-sensitive plants, light duration can also have
a serious effect on the final performance of the micropropagated plants, particularly those
meant for flower production. Hence, a neutral photoperiod of 12/12hr light/dark is preferred
during multiplication.
Freedom from diseases
It is necessary to initiate cultures from the meristem-tip and ensure further
multiplication free from viruses. For example, the badna virus in banana integrates into the
host genome during tissue culture and can become a source of infection in micropropagated
plants although parents are free from symptoms (Harper et al., 1999; Ndowora, 1999). If the
parent plant is virus infected, the cultures from its shoot-tip will likely be infected. Even the
meristem tip will carry over viruses unless thermo-therapy has been carried out and the
cultures have been tested virus free. Removal of viruses will be positively undesirable in
exceptional cases of ornamentals, where the characteristics are associated with the presence of
viruses, as in the case of the yellow vein geranium.
The quality tests should be rapid, and aim at the identification of a variety or clones, and
ignore point and bud-mutations, which occur in the normal population as a natural
phenomenon. A variety is an assemblage of closely similar genotypes and clones, and not a
group of “absolutely uniform” genotypes. Thus, the methods should be able to make a

64

distinction between two varieties, and not produce confusion with regard to intra-varietal
variability.
The tests for quality include endophytic bacterial count. Broad range identification
methods for the presence and quantification of endophytic bacteria are required and should be
the first tests in quality control. This will prevent production of plants contaminated with
undesired endophytic bacteria (Cf. Chapter 9), and may indirectly be a useful indicator of the
absence or of low concentration of viruses. Conventional bacteriological methods are enough
to standardize such a test. PCR based methods may provide identification of a wide range of
bacteria. For the identification of viruses, light microscopy for inclusion bodies has limited
sensitivity. Immunology based methods have been commonly used for detecting specific
viruses e.g. in potato. However, PCR methods are being increasingly developed and finding
increasing use.
Labeling and culture identity
Micropropagated varieties in culture and at the hardening stage are difficult to
distinguish visually from one another. Variety identification by proper labeling at all stages is
essential to ensure varietal identity. When several varieties of the same plant species are used,
accidental mislabeling or mixing may occur. Therefore, monitoring is essential to detect
admixtures at all stages. Clones of the mother variety should be maintained by conventional
vegetative propagation to fall back upon whenever necessary.
Varietal conformity
Varietal conformity based on morphological characters has been the basis for
identification in conventional propagation and the same applies to the plants derived from
tissue culture. However, considerable caution is advised in selecting morphological characters
for varietal conformity. For example, in sugarcane, variation in morphological characters such
as cane colour, shape of the bud, size of the ligule can vary in the different parts of the same
cane.
Where morphological characters of mother plants of diagnostic importance are due to
interaction with microbes, meristem tip culture invariably gives rise to a new phenotype due
to removal of such microbes. In such cases, the new virus free phenotype represents the
original expression of the new virus free phenotype (Cassells et al., 1980, Hendre et al.,
1975). Hence, criteria other than morphology are necessary for varietal conformity.
Morphological characters are not an absolute proof of genetic conformity or genetic stability
in tissue culture. Many times, physiological changes may lead to the appearance of types
among micropropagated plants that differ from the parental clone. In some cases, such
variants with minor phenotypic changes can be used for field production, but not for
propagation. Low frequency mutations and bud mutations occur in conventional populations
propagated from vegetative parts. Genetic changes not associated with morphological traits
can be detected by DNA based molecular methods. Somaclonal variants are undesirable in
cloning, but can be used for breeding.
DNA based molecular markers
DNA based molecular markers are not affected by the environment and are more
reliable than morphological characters for identification of varieties (Weising et al., 1995) but
are not a low cost option for small facilities. Hybridization and RAPD (Randomly Amplified

65

Polymorphic DNA) based methods can discriminate between varieties and clones. However,
the differences between the donor plant and those regenerated through tissue culture cannot be
detected with such methods. Only in a few cases, it is possible to discriminate the mother
plants from the variant regenerated plants (Poulson et al., 1993; Nelke et al., 1993). Molecular
methods appear to be reliable for discrimination at the variety level.
Variety identification based on DNA fingerprinting, such as RAPD, microsatellites,
STR’s (Sequence Tagged Repeats), AFLP (Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism) and
multi-locus probes, is potentially useful. RAPD can be standardized within a short time
without elaborate knowledge of DNA sequence. However, limitations in the reproducibility of
this method (between two sets of experiment, two machines, two workers and two
laboratories) are well recognized. This limitation can be overcome by including a sample of
reference DNA. Epidermal patterns and structures and stomata, if stable in tissue culture, are
additional tools in variety diagnosis. If their validity is confirmed, they may be simpler than
RAPD and other molecular methods.
Cost and quality
For small facilities, molecular tests are expensive. For them, it is cheaper to obtain the
services of large or centralized laboratories (e.g. departments of agriculture and universities),
which can either index cultures for a fee or supply indexed mother cultures at regular
intervals. Unequivocal tests can help to develop in-house quality control systems. Such tests
can be used for developing third party inspection systems, and provide a practical basis for
statutory quality control systems.
REFERENCES
Bhojwani, S.S. and Razdan, M.K. 1983. Plant Tissue Culture: Theory and Practice. Elsevier
Pub. Amsterdam.
Boxus, P. 1976. Rapid production of virus-free strawberry by in vitro culture. Acta Hortic. 66:
35-38.
Brown, P.T.H., Lange, F.D., Kranz., E., and Lorz, H. 1993. Analysis of single protoplasts and
regenerated plants by PCR and RAPD technology. Mol. Gen. Genet. 237: 311-317.
Cassells, A.C., Minas, G. and Long, R. 1980. Culture of Pelargonium hybrids from meristems
and explants: Chimeral and beneficially-infected varieties. In Tissue Culture Methods
for Plant Pathologists. Ingram, D.S. and Helgeson, J.P. (Eds.) Blackwell Scientific Pub.
Oxford. Pp.125-130.
Chowdhury, M.K.V. and Vasil, I.K. 1993. Molecular analysis of plants regenerated from
embryogenic culture of hybrid sugarcane cultivar (Saccharum spp.). Theor. Appl.
Genet. 86: 181-188.
Jain, S.M., Brar, D.S. and Ahloowalia, B.S. (Eds.) 2002. Molecular Techniques in Crop
Improvement. Kluwer Acad. Press, Dordrecht.
Harper, G., Osuji, J.O., Heslop-Harrison, J.S. and Hull, R. 1999. Integration of banana streak
badanavirus into the Musa genome: molecular and cytogenetic evidence. Virology 225:
207-213.
Hendre, R.R., Mascarenhas, A.F., Pathak, M., Nadgir, A.L. and Jagannathan, V. 1975.
Growth of virus free sugarcane plants from apical meristem. Indian Phytopathology 28:
175-178.
Hoepfner, A.S., Nybom, H., Carlsson, U. and Franzen, R. 1993. DNA fingerprinting useful
for monitoring cell line identity in micropropagated raspberries. Acta. Agric. Scad. (Sec.
B.) 43: 53-57.

66

Luddon, P, and Carlson, P.S. 1980. Use of plant cell cultures in biochemistry. In: Tobert, N.E.
(Ed.) The Plant Cell. The Biochemistry of Plants: A Comprehensive Treatise. Vol. I.
Acad. Press, New York. Pp.55-90.
Murashige, T. 1980. Plant growth substances in commercial uses of tissue culture. In: Plant
Growth Substances. Skoog, F. (Ed.) Springer-Verlag, Berlin. Pp.426-434.
Nelke, M., Nowak, J., Wright, J.M., and McLean, N.L. 1993. DNA fingerprinting of red
clover (Trifolium pratense L) with Jeffrey’s probes: detection of somaclonal variation
and other applications. Plant Cell Rep. 13: 72-78.
Ndowora, T., Dahal, G., LaFleur, D., Harper, G., Hull, R., Olszewski, N. E. and Lockhart, B.
1999. Evidence that badnavirus infection in Musa can originate from integrated pararetroviral sequences. Virology 255: 214-220.
Parent, J.G. and Page, D. 1992. Identification of raspberry cultivars by non-radioactive DNA
fingerprinting. HortScience 27: 1108-1110.
Pierik, R.L.M. 1989. In Vitro Culture of Higher Plants. Martinus Nijhoff Pub. Dordrecht.
Poulsen, G.B., Kahl, G. and Weising, K. 1993. Abundance and polymorphism of simple
repetitive DNA sequences in Brassica napus L. Theor. Appl. Genet. 85: 994-1000.
Sankaranarayanan, K., Natarajan, B.V, and Marimuthammal, S. 1986. Sugarcane Varieties
under Cultivation in India. Indian Council of Agric. Res., New Delhi.
Schmidt, T., Boblenz, K., Metzlaff, M., Kaemmer, D., Weising, K. and Kajl, G. 1993. DNA
fingerprinting in sugar beet (Beta vulgaris) – identification of double-haploid breeding
lines. Theor. Appl. Genet. 85: 653-657.
Weising, K, Nybom, H., Wolff, K. and Meyer, W. 1995. DNA Fingerprinting in Plants and
Fungi. CRC Press, London.

67

PRIMING TISSUE CULTURED PROPAGULES
J. NOWAK
Department of Horticulture, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of America
K. PRUSKI
Department of Plant and Animal Sciences, Nova Scotia Agricultural College,
Truro, Nova Scotia, Canada
Abstract. Priming of in vitro propagules refers to the manipulation of the growing environment, prior to
and upon transplanting, and is an integral part of tissue culture propagation. Tissue-cultured propagules
are produced under controlled environment. Such plantlets have small juvenile leaves with reduced
photosynthetic capacity, and malfunctioning stomata. Priming for rooting, shooting, and improved
photosynthesis can be achieved with growth regulators and simple adjustment to the growing conditions
that affect the post-transplanting performance of the propagules. Vented closures with microbial filters
have been used to facilitate gas exchange to reduce ethylene build-up that stunts plant growth, reduces
leaf-size, and causes leaf drop in tissue culture containers. Plantlets produced under photoautotrophic
culture systems on media with or without sucrose but CO2-enrichment, increased light intensity, good
gas exchange and reduced humidity are more vigorous, have larger root- systems, and are less
susceptible to microbial contamination. Plants adapted gradually to the ex-vitro environment have
improved survival upon transfer to soil. Plants in their natural environment are colonized with many
bacteria, fungi, and mycorrhizae. In-vitro or ex-vitro biopriming of micropropagated plants with such
organisms can improve plant performance under stress environments, and consequently enhances yield.

INTRODUCTION
The adaptation of plants to the environment - temperature, osmotic stress, and
pathogens, is triggered by modification of expression of specific genes and metabolic
pathways. Certain chemicals, environmental factors, and microorganisms pre-sensitise the
cellular metabolism of plants. Upon exposure to stress, the pre-sensitised or primed plants
adapt better and faster than the non-primed plants (Conrath et al., 2002). The production of
high quality and vigorous plants through in vitro culture requires the enhancement of posttransplanting ability for water management, efficiency of photosynthesis and resistance to
diseases. Priming of in vitro propagules, based on manipulation of the growing environment
(chemical, physical and biological) prior to and upon transplanting, is an integral part of tissue
culture propagation. The ability of the propagules to withstand transplanting stress very often
determines the success or failure of tissue culture operations.
Tissue-cultured propagules are produced in controlled environments under pre-set
temperature and low-light intensity, and in small vessels with poor air exchange. This leads to
high humidity and accumulation of ethylene (Jeong et al., 1995). Also, the nutrients in the
growing media, sucrose, mineral salts, vitamins and growth regulators, are far in excess of those
in the soil. Such an environment causes developmental distortions, and represses or modulates
several metabolic pathways. As a result, the plantlets have small juvenile leaves with reduced
photosynthetic capacity, and malfunctioning stomata. The roots of such plants lack hair or have
few, and the leaves have poor cuticle development and low wax deposit (Pierik, 1987; Ziv,
1991).

69

Priming for rooting
The ability to manage water, photosynthesis and response to stress during and after in vitro
culture determines the final performance of the propagules. The formation of a functional root
system is an essential step to manage water under the post vitro conditions. The in vitro roots
remain functional and continue to grow during ex-vitro acclimatisation. Easy to root species,
(e.g. potato) usually regenerate roots upon subculture on hormone-free medium. However, root
architecture and biomass partitioning between roots and shoots can be easily manipulated by
simple adjustment to the growing conditions that affect the post-transplanting performance of the
propagules. For example, increasing day/night temperature from 20/15 to 33/250C either slightly
stimulates or has no effect on the shoot growth in clones of potato, but dramatically enhances
root growth and root branching (Bensalim et al., 1998).
Several chemicals also influence the development of the root system. Abscisic acid is
known to affect initiation of new lateral roots and overall changes to the root architecture
(Hooker and Thorpe, 1998). Jasmonic acid (JA) has a similar effect. Low JA concentrations (0.51.0µM) stimulate both root and shoot growth (Fig.1). Jasmonates induce stress resistance in
plants (Conrath et al., 2002), and may be useful for priming of in vitro plants during the last
subculture. In potato, nodal explants from JA primed stock plants tuberize earlier and more
uniformly, and produce more microtubers than the non-primed controls (Pruski et al., 2002).
Salicylic acid (SA) is a major signalling compound and induces abiotic and biotic stress
resistance in plants (Conrath et al., 2002). It also induces adventitious roots in cuttings and
stomata closure, and inhibits ethylene biosynthesis in detached leaves (Huang et al., 1993);
hence it may also be useful for priming tissue-cultured propagules.
Many woody and herbaceous perennials require auxins for rooting. Auxins are involved in
root initiation and adventitious root formation (Klerk et al., 1997). However, excessive auxins
after root induction may inhibit root regeneration and elongation, and impair formation of a good
root system. Therefore, a careful selection of the auxin type and concentration is recommended.
IAA and IBA are usually used for easier-to-root plants and NAA for more recalcitrant woody
plants. The efficacy of different auxins also depends on the explant type, and exposure to light.
For example, a short duration (3-7 days) of dark incubation enhanced rooting in apple (Klerk et
al., 1997), and papaya (Yu, et al., 2000).
Addition of low concentration of the growth retardant daminozide to hormone-free
medium enhanced post-transplanting acclimatisation of potato plants (Tadesse et al., 2000).
Other supplements like activated charcoal, seaweed concentrate, pyroligneus acid, and dilution
of salts in the basic MS medium can also aid root initiation and growth (Pierik, 1987). In vitro
cultured papaya shoots in aerated vermiculite gave better rooting with higher post-transplanting
survival than on non-aerated vermiculite and non-aerated agar (Yu et al., 2000).
In some difficult-to-root species, e.g. apple and Saskatoon berries (Amelanchier alnifolia
Nutt.), in vitro rejuvenation via several subcultures is required before successful rooting of
microcuttings. Individual cultivars may require adjustment to culture conditions and different
number of subcultures. For example, over 90% rooting was achieved with apple microshoots, cv.
‘Jonathan’ by the ninth subculture, but a more recalcitrant variety ‘Red Delicious’ required over
30 subcultures for successful rooting (Howard and Marks, 1987). In Saskatoon berries, where
rooting by traditional stem cuttings is very difficult, tissue culture rejuvenation and subsequent
transplanting to the greenhouse can generate highly vigorous plants. Shoot cuttings taken from
such planted hedges readily root within 2-3 weeks after a simple treatment with IBA (Pruski et
al., 1990).

70

0.5
1.0
1.5
5.0
Jasmonic acid concentration (µM)

10

25

Figure 1. Five-week-old potato plants cv. ‘Kennebec’ grown on 10 ml hormone-free MS
medium (pH 5.7, 3% sucrose, vitamins and 0.6% agar), supplemented with various
concentrations of JA at 22/18ºC day/night temperature, 16 h photoperiod, 150 µE-2s-1
fluorescent light.

Increasing photosynthetic competence
Tissue culture containers provide sterile conditions and high moisture, thereby
preventing contamination and desiccation of the explant, but restrict aeration and escape of
metabolically generated ethylene and water vapors. Such conditions slow down growth and
induce undesirable morphological changes. The ethylene build-up stunts plant growth and
reduces leaf-size, and causes leaf drop. Such plants desiccate quickly upon transfer to the
external environment. Vented closures, including those for baby-food-jars with built-in
different sizes of microbial filters, have been used to facilitate gas exchange between culture
vessels and the ambient environment.
High relative humidity in culture vessel reduces deposition of epicuticular waxes on
leaves. It impairs the functioning of stomata and alters leaf mesophyll by reducing the
number of palisade cells and by forming spongy parenchyma with large air spaces. Other
effects include low nutrient uptake due to decreased transpiration, decreased lignification,
and reduced or abnormal development of the vascular system (Debergh et al., 1992; Kozai,
1991; Ziv, 1991). Although the cuticular wax development and stomata functioning can be

71

induced by gradual adjustment to lower humidity, morphological changes cannot be easily
reversed. The altered leaf morphology reduces photosynthesis and enhances respiration.
Cooling the bottom of culture vessels by 2-3oC below the ambient air temperature in the
culture room or providing high light intensity can reduce high humidity. Gradual opening of
vessels for a few days prior to transplanting can also adjust high humidity (Ziv, 1991).
Many micropropagated plants have C3 photosynthetic pathway; hence, are greatly
affected in their ability to assimilate carbon. The balance between photosynthesis and
photorespiration controls their productivity (Ku et al., 1977). Under the traditional methods of
micropropagation, cultures are usually mixotrophic (use carbon source mostly from sucrose in
the medium as well as photosynthesis). The carbohydrates in the media inhibit carbon
assimilation via photosynthesis by reducing rubisco (ribulose-1-5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase) activity (Kozai et al., 1995). On the other hand, several studies
indicate a stimulatory effect of sugar on biomass accumulation under elevated CO2 (Nowak et
al., 1999).
In the photoautotrophic culture systems the cultures are grown under CO2-enrichment
(1000-1500µmol mol-1), increased light intensity (at least 150µmol m-2, s-1), good gas
exchange and reduced humidity, and on media with or without or sucrose (Kozai et al., 1997).
Plantlets produced under such conditions are more vigorous, have larger root- systems, and
are less susceptible to microbial contamination (Jeong et al., 1995). They are able to
photosynthesize, and do not require acclimatization during post-vitro establishment.
Priming for temperature tolerance
In vitro grown plantlets can be acclimatized to low temperatures for cold tolerance under
field conditions. Alfalfa and red clover seedlings withstood -16 and -10o C, respectively, upon
cold hardening at 2-5o C, 80µE m-2, s-1 light and 8h photoperiod, for 3-5 weeks. Such
hardening has been successfully utilized in the selection of cold tolerant alfalfa and red clover
genotypes (Nowak et al., 1992). Elevation of sucrose in the culture medium or application of
abscisic acid, or both, may further improve plantlet hardiness in some species (Chang and
Reed, 2001).
Acclimatization to soil transfer
Good quality propagules with well developed roots and leaves are easy to acclimatize to the
external environment. Any successful acclimatization protocol must ensure that the plants
maintain active growth during the entire weaning period (McCown, 1986). The effect of in
vitro growth conditions on post-vitro acclimatization has been demonstrated in grapevine
(Amâncio et al., 1999) and chile ancho pepper, Capsicum annuum L. (Estrada-Luna et al.,
2000). The most common approach to improve plant survival upon transfer to soil is their
gradual adaptation to the ex-vitro environment. Under such conditions, plants rapidly convert
from heterotrophic or photomixotrophic to autotrophic growth, form fully functional root
systems, and their stomatal and cuticular transpiration is reduced (Ziv, 1986). Such gradual
adaptation is often carried out in greenhouses by decreasing relative humidity using fog or
mist chambers and increasing light intensity and shading techniques. Light intensity needs to
be adjusted to the plant requirements. Rooting of in vitro produced shoots in vivo is
recommended for some species to promote development of roots already adapted to external
conditions, to prevent potential damage to fragile in vitro roots, or to avoid post-rooting
dormancy. Other treatments of in vitro plantlets upon transplanting to the outside environment
include high phosphate fertilizer to enhance their vigor, fungicides to prevent damping-off

72

(Debergh and Read, 1991) and anti-transpirants to prevent desiccation; however, they may
cause phytotoxicity (Jeong et al., 1995).
A simple, low cost method for ex vitro weaning and liner production of woody plant
species and Hosta has been developed (Pruski, K., unpublished). The shoots with root-initials
from the rooting medium are transplanted in ‘Jiffy’TM plugs (Fig. 2). Plants are acclimatized in
plastic trays (25x50x5cm) with transparent cover. Each tray holds 300 plugs, each 18mm
diameter. The plugs are saturated in a 2.5-3L solution of fertilizer (1g/L) 10-52-10 NPK; the
excess solution is discarded before transplanting. The plants are watered weekly (approx. 1L
water/week) and kept in the growth room benches for 3-weeks after transplanting at 2224/20ºC day/night, 14h photoperiod, under 120 µEm-2s-1 fluorescent light. The current cost is
US$73 for 5400 plugs, $58 for 100 trays, and $60 for 100 plastic covers; the total cost per
plug being US$0.018. The rooting success in woody plants, e.g. Swedish columnar aspen,
Saskatoon berry, chokecherry and pincherry cultivars, sour cherry, low bush blueberries and
others was more than 95%, and 100% with hosta varieties.
In seed potato production, 2 to 4-week old tissue cultured plantlets are usually hardened
off for 2-4 weeks in a greenhouse, and transplanted in the field. Such plantlets are still juvenile
and not well adapted to stress. To prevent desiccation, insect and bird damage, and spread of
viruses by aphid, many growers cover plants with floating covers and install an overhead
irrigation system. Seed potatoes produced under floating covers are consistently better in
quality than those from the unprotected planting.

Figure 2. Plant acclimatization in plastic trays with transparent cover. Left. Trays in a
growth room bench next to culture vessels. Right. Aspen (Populus tremula var. erecta) liners
in Jiffy plugs, three weeks after transplanting.
In vitro produced-propagules of woody species, e.g. Saskatoon berry (Amelanchier
alnifolia Nutt.), Chokecherry (Prunus virginiana L.), Pincherry (P. pennsylvanica L.),
Swedish columnar aspen (Populus tremula var. erecta), European weeping birch (Betula
pendula var. ‘Gracilis’ become dormant after rooting. In vitro rooted Saskatoon berry is
particularly prone to dormancy as stress factors readily induce terminal bud dormancy. When
the shoots stop growth, leaf shedding occurs in the culture or soon after transplanting, and the
propagules desiccate. The liners produced from such plants are less vigorous and difficult to
establish in the field. In Chokecherry (P. virginiana L.), dormancy symptoms of shoots with

73

reddish leaves and cessation of terminal-bud growth are induced upon depletion of nutrients
in the medium. Post-rooting dormancy has also been reported in rhododendrons and low bush
blueberries. Adding low amounts of gibberellic acid (GA) to the medium prevents dormancy,
although shoots treated with GA are difficult to root (Pruski et al., 2000). In Saskatoon berry,
ex-vitro rooting under non-sterile conditions is helpful, although does not eliminate the
problem. Spraying leaves of ex vitro rooted-shoots with BAP (400ppm), followed by GA4+7
(100-PPM) the next day prevents dormancy (Pruski et al., 1990).
Priming somatic embryo-derived plants
Somatic embryos are produced as adventitious structures directly on explants of zygotic
embryos, from callus and suspension cultures (Cf. Chapter 1). The stress inducing molecules
in plants, ABA and JA have been successfully used to facilitate embryo maturation and
priming for resistance to post transplanting stress. ABA and osmotic shock with 6% sucrose is
a routine step to induce desiccation tolerance in alfalfa synthetic seeds. Osmotic stress
induction with 3% sorbitol was effective in embryo maturation and conversion in soybean
cultures (Walker and Parrott, 2001) and ABA treatment combined with partial desiccation of
encapsulated somatic embryos in sugarcane (Nieves et al., 2001). Several sugar alcohols and
polyethylene glycol have been tested with different degrees of success for priming SE
propagules of various plants (Walker and Parrott, 2001). In conifers, post ABA embryo
maturation has been significantly improved by benzyl adenine (BA) (Schuller et al., 2000).
The lowering of sucrose concentration from 58 to 29mM in the proliferation medium
improved the formation of cotyledonary SE on the maturation medium. Interaction between
plant growth regulators and various carbohydrates and organic nitrogen compounds in embryo
development and maturation has been reported (Schuller et al., 2000).
BIOPRIMING
Plants in their natural environment are colonized both by external and internal
microorganisms. Some microorganisms, particularly beneficial bacteria and fungi, can
improve plant performance under stress environments, and consequently enhance yield
(Brown, 1974; Lazarovits and Nowak, 1997; Creus et al., 1998). Plants infected by
microorganisms develop systemic resistance (systemic acquired resistance, SAR, or inducedsystemic resistance, ISR), and/or benefit from their antagonistic abilities towards pathogens
(cross protection). Although, the inoculation of seeds with beneficial microorganisms has
been practiced for more than 50 years, the inoculation of tissue culture propagules to enhance
plant performance is relatively new. Plant tissue culture is based on axenic (contaminant-free)
culture systems. Hence, microorganisms, including endophytes, are treated as problemcausing contaminants, and various procedures have been developed to eliminate them. Only
recently, have microbial inoculants, primarily bacterial and mycorrhizal, been evaluated as
propagule priming agents both as in vitro co-cultures and on transplanting.
Standard microbiological techniques allow culturing only a few percent of the naturally
occurring microorganisms. Moreover, the soil and plant associated bacteria can switch
between culturable and unculturable stages. The development of new culture methods that
allow the establishment of stable associations between plants and beneficial organisms, both
in vitro and ex vitro, under different environments is a major challenge of future research.

74

In vitro bacterization
Rhizosphere bacteria interact with plants and other inhabiting organisms by producing a
wide array of chemicals. Many of these chemicals exhibit plant regulatory activity. There is
increasing evidence that the bacteria associated with plants (endophytic and epiphytic) induce
host resistance to environmental stresses. This is commonly linked to the production of salicilate
or jasmonate, or both (Conrath et al., 2002). These two types of signalling chemicals are
associated with resistance to biotic stress. Recent molecular evidence in Arabidopsis thaliana
inoculated with the plant growth promoting rhizobacterium, Paenibacillus polymyxa, indicates
however, that the abiotic and biotic stress-resistance are linked.
An effective plant beneficial bacterium, Pseudomonas spp. strain PsJN, was used to
enhance tolerance to transplanting stress in potato. The bacterium was originally isolated as a
contaminant from Glomus vesiculiferum infected onion roots. A key element in its isolation was
that the bacterium (Pseudomonas sp. strain PsJN) did not grow on a standard potato culture
medium in the absence of plantlets. Pre-selection of plant beneficial bacteria on plant tissue
culture media is thus recommended as a critical step in the development of an in vitro co-culture
system, so the bacteria do not overgrow the culture.
Dipping potato nodal cuttings in a suspension of a beneficial bacterium can dramatically
affect in vitro growth of plantlets. So far, our isolate, Pseudomonas sp. strain PsJN, has been the
most effective plant growth promoting bacterium under in vitro conditions (Conn et al., 1997;
Nowak, 1998). It forms endophytic and epiphytic populations when co-cultured either with
potato, tomato and grapevine. Thus, in clonal propagation by nodal explants, there is no need for
further re-inoculation. The bacterium stimulates plant growth and induces changes that lead to
better water management. It also enhances resistance to low level pathogens of potato and
tomato (Lazarovits and Nowak, 1997; Sharma and Nowak, 1998) and to Botrytis cinerea
infection of grapevine (Barka et al., 2002). The inoculated plantlets had a massive and wellbranched root system after four weeks in culture, and were more advanced developmentally
(Frommel et al., 1991). The stems were sturdier with more lignin deposits around the vascular
system, more root hairs and more and larger leaf hairs (Nowak, 1998). Stomata function of the
bacterized in vitro plantlets closely resembled those of the greenhouse hardened non-bacterized
transplants. In wheat seedlings exposed to osmotic stress, improvement of water relations has
been observed by their co-culture with Azospirillum brasiliense strain SP245 (Creus et al., 1997).
Enhanced transplant survival of black locust (Rabinia pseudoacacia L.), inoculated with
different Rhizobium isolates selected for growth vigour from Rabinia varieties, has also been
reported (Balla et al., 1997).
The stimulation of adventitious rooting in cultures with Agrobacterium rhizogenes is well
known. It was successfully used to enhance rooting of two Mexican species of Pinus (VillalobosAmador et al., 2002). Rooting of somatic embryo-derived adventitious shoots (15-30 mm long)
increased between 7-13%, and in shoots co-cultured with A. rhizogenes to 67% compared with
60% in the auxin treated controls. Root development was also induced in slash pine explants on
co-culture with the bacterium isolates (Burns and Schwarz, 1996). The bacterium-induced roots
resembled seedling roots rather than hairy roots, which are induced with A. rhizogenes. Induction
of root elongation has been observed in potato plants co-cultured in vitro with some strains of
Rhizobium leguminosarum biovar trifolii, isolated from the root nodules of red clover (Fig. 4).
The bacterization of shoot explants of oregano with a Pseudomonas sp. prevented
vitrification. The oregano plantlets co-cultured with the bacterium had lower water content,
but more phenolics and chlorophyll than the non-bacterized controls (Shetty et al., 1995).

75

Similar responses were recorded with potato and vegetable crops. Bacterized plantlets were
greener, had elevated levels of cytokinins, PAL (phenylalanine ammonia-lyase), free
phenolics (especially chlorogenic and caffeic acids) (Nowak et al., 1997), and contained more
lignin. In potato, elevated PAL activity in bacterized plants was found during the first four
weeks of growth, there being no difference in its level in six week-old plants. However, when
explants were taken from six-week-old bacterized and control stock plants, PAL activity in
the newly derived shoots was higher in the pre-bacterized treatment (Nowak et al., 1997).
This suggests that pre-bacterized plantlets respond faster to cutting injuries, a critical factor in
the induced host resistance to pathogen attack.
In vitro bacterization of potato and vegetable plantlets significantly enhanced their post
transplanting survival vigour. Enhanced vigour of potato plantlets co-cultured with isolates of
Pseudomonas fluorescence isolated from tubers, during and after weaning has also been reported
(Duffy et al., 1999). In greenhouse experiments, plants derived from dual cultures of potato and
our pseudomonad bacterium had larger root systems and stolons, tuberized earlier, and gave
higher tuber yields than the non-bacterized controls (Dunbar, 1997). The bacterized potato
plantlets transplanted directly from culture vessels to the field had significantly better survival
than the non-bacterized controls (Nowak et al., 1999); however, the tuber yield varied from year
to year; high precipitation or severe drought reduced the benefits of bacterization.
Tissue culture techniques provide an opportunity for the introduction of nitrogen fixing
endophytes (other than Rhizobia) into clonally propagated plants for sustainable production
systems. A protocol has been developed to inoculate micropropagated sugarcane plantlets with
Acetobacter diazotrophicus at the end of the rooting period on medium with 10X diluted salts
and sugar but without hormones and vitamins. Thirty days after transplanting, the bacteria could
be re-isolated from the plant tissues (Reis et al., 1999). Stable artificial associations between
plants and nitrogen fixing bacteria have been also reported. A symbiotic culture system of callus
and bacteria between Daucus carota L. and Azotobacter zettuovii (CRS-H6) was developed. The
callus grew for four years on the nitrogen-free medium with lactose as the carbon source. The
bacteria located in the intracellular spaces were transmitted to newly regenerated plantlets and
fixed nitrogen (Varga et al., 1994). Similar stable associations were established with tomato,
potato, wheat, sugarcane and poplar, using different strains of eight Azotobacter species (Varga,
S.S. Personal communication), and in strawberries with Azomonas insignis (Preininger et al.,
1997). In tomato, the bacterium was transmitted through the seed. Approximately, 20% of the
seedlings from the seed of tomato cocultured with Azotobacter beijerinckii showed N2 fixing
activity two months after germination (Varga, S.S. Personal communication).
Ex vitro bacterization
To comply with the certification requirements of plant tissue culture propagules,
commercial laboratories are hesitant to introduce microorganisms into their in vitro cultures.
One approach is to wean plants in rhizosphere with both beneficial bacteria and mycorrhizal
fungi. In potato, the tissue-cultured plantlets are readily infected both in external and internal
tissues with bacteria present in the transplanting medium. This approach, although attractive,
will have to deal with the problem of maintaining stable populations of the introduced
microorganisms. The beneficial effects of bacterial inoculation on tree seedlings (Enebak et
al., 1998) and greenhouse produced potato tubers (Nowak et al., 1999) show the potential of
post-vitro bacterization of tissue-cultured propagules. The post-vitro mycorrhization and
bacterization of micropropagated strawberry, potato and azalea with certain combinations of
bacteria and mycorrhiza enhanced greenhouse production of minitubers, and a mixture of

76

three strains of rhizobacteria improved the post-transplanting performance of strawberries
(Vosatka et al., 2000).
Mycorrhization
The inoculation of tissue-cultured plantlets with endomycorrhizal fungi is beneficial to
plant growth. It is well known that the root colonization with vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizae
(VAM) improves plant nutritional status, water management and disease resistance (Fortin et al.,
2002). Several secondary metabolites (cyclohexenone derivatives) with structural similarity to
abscisic acid have been identified in tobacco roots in response to the Glomus intraradices
infection (Maier et al., 1999). A variety of phenylpropanoid compounds induced by
ectomycorrhizal inoculants, have also been identified in several conifers. Such compounds are
related to the biotic and abiotic stress management in plants.
To improve the performance of tissue-cultured plantlets, rooted-shoots have been
inoculated with mycorrhiza at transplanting. The benefits of mycorrhization depended on the
growing medium, plant and mycorrhizal species, and the degree of root colonization. Because
VAM stimulated growth of plants was frequently expressed only after acclimatization, it was
suggested to develop a culture system where the mycorrhizal fungi are introduced in vitro during
the rooting stage (Wang et al., 1993). It is possible to grow fungi in vitro on Ri T-DNA
transformed carrot roots under elevated CO2. Capitalizing on this technique, a ‘tripartite’ culture
system for in vitro inoculation of strawberries (Desjardins, 1995) and vegetable crops was
developed. The most effective treatment consisted of 30 day-old VAM (Glomus intraradices)
transformed carrot-root culture and strawberry shoots in cellulose plugs. After root induction, the
plugs were placed on the surface of the mycorrhized root culture and kept in a growth chamber
under 5000 PPM CO2 for 20 days. All plantlets were successfully colonized, and exhibited a
larger root system, better shoot growth, and a higher (more negative) osmotic potential when
compared to non-mycorrhized controls. It is suggested that the enhancement of osmotic potential
is important in the pre-adaptation step prior to full acclimation of plantlets for transplanting. The
high osmotic potential of wheat seedlings co-cultured with Azospirillum allowed them to
withstand osmotic stress much better than non-inoculated controls with low osmotic potential
(Creus et al., 1998). In strawberry, mycorrhized plants had a better establishment rate and
produced more runners than non-mycorrhized controls (Murphy et al., 1997). The plants were
grown in polyurethane foam substrate under photoautotrophic conditions with reduced sucrose
concentration in the medium. The foam tear-away strips fit into any culture vessel, and the VAM
spores can be placed directly in the planting holes. In garlic, improved growth was observed after
post-vitro transplant inoculation (Lubraco et al., 2000). Increased rooting and reduction in
weaning stress have been reported in the medicinal plant, Babtista tinctoria (L.) R. BR.
(Grotkass et al., 2000).
Several studies have demonstrated synergistic effects of VAM fungi and diazotrophic
bacteria on nutrition and growth of various crops (Paula et al., 1992). Such effects of
“mycorrhiza helper bacteria” need to be explored in tissue culture systems. Creation of
defined tissue culture microecosystems could allow the study of complexed plant–microbialenvironment interactions, which could refine and improve our traditional in vitro propagation
methods and prime the propagules for ex-vitro environments.

77

Priming with microbial derivatives
Cyanobacterial and fungal culture extracts have been shown to induce developmental
changes and pathogen resistance in tissue-cultured material when added to the medium.
Microbial culture filtrates have been reported for the control of plant tissue culture
contaminants (Hussain et al., 1994). An acetone precipitated fraction of Bacillus subtilis
Ehrnberg (strain 2) and Trichoderma viride Pers. (strain A) exhibited high antifungal activity,
and extracts from Pseudomonas fluorescence Migula (strain X) had high antibacterial activity.
The bacterial extracts did not reduce the performance of cultures of Nicotiana tabacum L.
over four subcultures but reduced the growth of accidental contaminants. Heat-stable mycelial
extracts of another Trichoderma species, a non-pathogenic T. longibrachiatum were triggered
induced-resistance response to Phytophthora parasitica var. nicotianae (race 0) in tobacco
seedlings (Chang et al., 1997). The extract induced expression of pathogenesis-related
proteins, PR-16 and osmotin (PR-5) at a higher level than the extract prepared in the same
manner from the pathogenic fungus.
REFERENCES
Amâncio, S., Rebordão, J.P. and Chave, M.M. 1999. Improvement of acclimatization of
micropropagated grapevine: Photosynthetic competence and carbon allocation. Plant
Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 58: 31-37.
Balla, I., Vertesy, J., Köves-Pechy, K., Vërös, I. and Bujtas, Z. 1997. Acclimation results of
micropropagated black locust (Robina pseudoacacia L.) improved by use of
microorganisms. In: Pathogen and Microbial Contamination Management in
Micropropagation. Cassells, A.L. (Ed.) Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.351-354.
Barka, E.A., Gognies, S., Nowak, J., Audran, J. and Belarbi, A. 2002. Inhibitory effect of
endophyte bacteria on Botrytis cinerea and its influence to promote the grapevine
growth. Biol. Control. 24: 135-142.
Bensalim, S., Nowak, J. and Asiedu S.K. 1998. Temperature and pseudomonad bacterium
effects on in vitro and ex vitro performance of 18 clones of potato. Am. Potato J. 75: 145152.
Brown, M.E. 1974. Seed and root bacterization. Ann. Rev. Phytopathol. 12: 181-197.
Burns, J.A., and. Schwarz, O.J. 1996. Bacterial stimulation of adventitious rooting on in vitro
cultured slash pine (Pinus elliottii Engelm.) seedling explants. Plant Cell Rep. 15: 405408.
Chang, Y. and Reed, B.M. 2001. Preculture conditions influence cold hardiness and regrowth
of Pyrus cordata shoot tips after cryopreservation. HortSci. 36: 1329-1333.
Chang, P.F.L., Xu, Y., Narasimhan, M.L., Chea, K.T., D’Urzo, M.P., Damsz, B., Kononowicz,
A.K., Abad, L., Hasegawa, P.M. and Bressan, R.A. 1997. Induction of pathogen resistance
and pathogenesis-related genes in tobacco by a heat-stable Trichoderma mycelial extract
and plant signal messengers. Physiol. Plant. 100: 341-352.
Conn, K.L., Nowak, J. and Lazarovits, G. 1997. A gnotobiotic bioassay for studying
interactions between potato and plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Can. J.
Microbiol. 43: 801-808.
Conrath, U., Pieterse, C.M.J. and Mauch-Mani, B. 2002. Priming in plant-pathogen interactions.
TIPS 7: 210-216.
Creus, C.M., Sueldo, R.J. and Barassi, C.A. 1998. Water relations in Azospirillum-inoculated
wheat seedlings under osmotic stress. Can. J. Bot. 76: 238-244.
Debergh, P., Aitken-Christie, J., Cohen, D., Grout, B., Arnold, von, S., Zimmerman, R. and Ziv,
M. 1992. Reconsideration of the term vitrification as used in micropropagation. Plant Cell
Tiss. Org. Cult. 30: 135-140.

78

Debergh, P.C. and Read, P.E. 1991. Micropropagation. In: Micropropagation Technology and
Applications. Debergh, P.C. and Zimmerman, R.H. (Eds.) Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht.
Pp.1-13.
Desjardins, Y. 1995. Overview of factors influencing photosynthesis of micropropagated
plantlets and their effect on acclimatization. In: Ecophysiology and photosynthetic in vitro
cultures. Carré, F., Chagvardieff, P. (Eds.) CEA, Aix-en-Provence. Pp.145-160.
Duffy, E.M., Hurley, E.M. and. Cassells, A.C. 1999. Weaning performance of potato
microplants following bacterization and mycorrhization. Potato Res. 42: 521-527.
Dunbar, C. 1997. Utilization of seaweed extract and plant growth promoting rhizobacterium in
greenhouse production of potato minitubers. M.Sc. Thesis, Dalhousie Univ. Halifax, NS.
Enebak, S.A., Wei, G. and Kloepper, J.W. 1998. Effects of plant growth-promoting
rhizobacteria on loblolly and slash pine seedlings. Forest Sci. 44: 139-144.
Estrada-Luna, A.A., Davies, Jr. F.T., and Egilla, J.N. 2000. Growth, gas exchange, and water
relations of micropropagated chile ancho pepper (Capsicum annuum L. cv. San Luis)
plantlets during acclimatization and post-acclimatization. HortSci. 35: 426. (Abst.)
Fortin, J.A., Bécard, G., Declerck, S., Dalpé, Y., St-Arnaud, M., Coughlan A.P. and. Piché Y.
2002. Arbuscular mycorrhiza on root-organ cultures. Can. J. Bot. 80: 1-20.
Frommel, M.I., Nowak, J. and Lazarovits, G. 1991. Growth enhancement and developmental
modifications of in vitro grown potato (Solanum tuberosum ssp. tuberosum) as affected by
a nonfluorescent Pseudomonas sp. Plant Physiol. 96: 928-936.
Grotkass, C., Hutter, I. and Feldmann, F. 2000. Use of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi to reduce
weaning stress of micropropagated Baptisia tinctoria (L.) R.Br. Acta Hort. 530: 305312.
Hooker, T.S. and Thorpe, T.A. 1998. Effects of fluridone and abscisic acid on lateral root
initiation and root elongation of excised tomato roots cultured in vitro. Plant Cell Tiss.
Org. Cult. 52: 199-203.
Howard, B.H. and Marks, T.R. 1987. The in vitro- in vivo interface. In: Advances in Chemical
Manipulation of Plant Tissue Cultures (Eds. Jackson, M.B., Mantell, S.H. and Blake, J.)
British Plant Growth Regulator Group, Monograph No. 16. Bristol. Pp.101-111.
Huang, Y.F., Chen, C.T. and Kao, C.H. 1993. Salicylic acid inhibits the biosynthesis of
ethylene in detached rice leaves. Plant Growth Regul. 12: 79-82.
Hussain, S., Lane, S.D. and Price D.N. 1994. A preliminary evaluation of the use of microbial
culture filtrates for the control of contaminants in plant tissue culture systems. Plant Cell
Tiss. Org. Cult. 36: 45-51.
Jeong, B.R., Fujiwara, K. and Kozai, T. 1995. Environmental control and photoautotrophic
micropropagation. Hort. Rev. 17: 125-172.
Klerk, G.J de, Brugge, J. and Maarinova, S. 1997. Effectiveness of indoleacetic acid,
indolebutyric acid and napththaleneacetic acid during adventitious root formation in
vitro in Malus ‘Jork 9’. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 49: 39-44.
Kozai, T. 1991. Micropropagation under photoautotrophic conditions. In: Micropropagation,
Technology and Application. Debergh, P.C. and Zimmerman, R.M. (Eds.). Kluwer Acad.
Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.447-469.
Kozai, T., Watanabe, K. and Jeong, B.R. 1995. Stem elongation and growth of Solanum
tuberosum L. in vitro in response to photosynthetic photon flux, photoperiod and
difference in photoperiod and dark period temperatures. Sci. Hortic.64: 1-9.
Kozai, T., Kubota, C. and Jeong, B.R. 1997. Environmental control for the large-scale
production of plants through in vitro techniques. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 51: 49-56.
Ku, S.B., Edwards, G.E. and Tanne, C.B. 1977. Effects of light, carbon dioxide, and
temperature on photosynthesis, oxygen inhibition of photosynthesis, and transpiration in
Solanum tuberosum. Plant Physiol. 59: 868-872.

79

Lazarovits, G. and Nowak, J. 1997. Rhizobacteria for improvement of plant growth and
establishment. HortSci. 32: 188-192.
Lubraco, G., Schubert, A. and Previati, A. 2000. Micropropagation and mycorrhization of
Allium sativum. Acta Hort. 530: 339-344.
Maier, W., Schmidt, J., Wray, V., Walter, M.H and Strack, D. 1999. The arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungus, Glomus intraradices, induces the accumulation of cyclohexenone
derivatives in tobacco roots. Planta 207: 620-623.
McCown, B.H. 1986. Plug systems for micropropagules. In: Tissue Culture as a Plant Production
System for Horticultural Crops. Zimmerman, R.H., Griesbach, R.J., Hammerschlag, F.A.
and Lawson, R.H (Eds.). Martinus Nijhoff Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.53-60.
Murphy, J., Mark, L., Periappuram, C. Walsh, C. and Cassells, A.C. 1997. Microbial
characterisation and preparation of inoculum for in vitro mycorrhization of strawberry in
autotrophic culture. In: Pathogen and Microbial Contamination Management in
Micropropagation. Cassells, A.L. (Ed.) Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.345-350.
Nieves, N., Martínez, M.E, Castillo, R., Blanco, M.A. and González-Olmedo, J.L. 2001.
Effect of abscisic acid and jasmonic acid on partial desiccation of encapsulated somatic
embryos of sugarcane. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 65: 15-21.
Nowak, J., Matheson, S.L., McLean, N.L. and Havard, P. 1992. Regenerative trait and cold
hardiness in highly productive cultivars of alfalfa and red clover. Euphytica 59:189-196.
Nowak, J., Asiedu, S.K., Bensalim, S., Richards, J., Stewart, A. Smith, C., Stevens, D. and Sturz,
A.V. 1997. From laboratory to applications: challenges and progress with in vitro dual
cultures of potato and beneficial bacteria. In: Pathogen and Microbial Contamination
Management in Micropropagation. Cassells, A.C. (Ed.) Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht.
Pp.321-329.
Nowak, J. 1998. Benefits of in vitro “biotization” of plant tissue cultures with microbial
inoculants. In Vitro Cell Dev. Biol.-Plant 34: 122-130.
Nowak, J., Bensalim, S., Smith, C.D., Dunbar, C., Asiedu, S.K., Madani, A., Lazarovits, G.,
Northcott, D. and Sturz, A.V. 1999. Behaviour of plant material issued from in vitro
bacterization. Potato Res. 42: 505-519.
Paula, M.A., Reis, V.M. and Döbereiner, J. 1991. Interactions of Glomus clarum with
Acetobacter diazotrophicus in infection of sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), sugarcane
(Saccharum spp.), and sweet sorghum (Sorghum vulgare). Biol. Fert. Soil 11: 111-115.
Pierik, R.L.M. 1987. In vitro Culture of Higher Plants. Martinus Nijhoff Pub. Dordrecht.
Preininger, É., Zatykó, J., Szücs, P., Korányl, P. and Gyurján, I. 1997. In vitro establishment of
nitrogen-fixing strawberry (Fragaria x annassa) via artificial symbiosis with Azomonas
insignis. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol.-Plant 33: 190-194.
Pruski, K., Nowak, J. and Grainger, G. 1990. Micropropagation of four cultivars of the
Saskatoon berry (Amelanchier alnifolia Nutt.). Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 21: 103-109.
Pruski, K., Lewis, T., Astatkie, T. and Nowak, J. 2000. Micropropagation of Chokecherry
and Pincherry cultivars. Plant Cell Org. Tiss. Cult. 63: 93-100.
Pruski, K., Astatkie, T. and Nowak, J. 2002. Jasmonate effects on in vitro tuberization and
tuber bulking in two potato cultivars (Solanum tubersosum L.) under different media
and photoperiod conditions. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol.-Plant 38: 203-209.
Reis, V. M., Olivares, F. L., Martinez de Oliveria, A. L., Reis, dos, Jr, F. B., Baldani, J.I. and
Döbereiner, J. 1999. Technical approaches to inoculate micropropagated sugar cane
plants were Acetobacater diazotrophicus. Plant Soil 206: 205-211.
Sharma, V.K. and Nowak, J. 1998. Enhancement of verticillium wilt resistance in tomato
transplants by in vitro co-culture of seedlings with a plant growth promoting
rhizobacterium (Pseudomonas sp. strain PsJN). Can. J. Microbiol. 44: 528-536.

80

Schuller, A., Kirchner-Neß, R. and Reuther, G. 2000. Interaction of plant growth regulators
and organic C and N components in the formation and maturation of Abies alba somatic
embryos. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 60: 23-31.
Shetty, K., Curtis, O.F., Levin, R.E., Witkowsky, R. and Ang, W. 1995. Prevention of
vitrification associated with in vitro shoot culture of oregano (Origanum vulgare) by
Pseudomonas spp. J. Plant Physiol. 147: 447-451.
Tadesse, M., W. J. M. Lommen, and P. C. Struik. 2000. Effects of in vitro treatments on leaf
area growth of potato transplants during acclimatisation. Plant Cell Tiss. Organ Cult.
61: 59-67.
Varga, S.S., Korányi, P., Preininger, É. and Gyurján. I. 1994. Artificial associations between
Daucus and nitrogen-fixing Azotobacter cells in vitro. Physiol. Plant. 90: 786-790.
Villalobos-Amador, E., Rodríguez-Hernández, G. and E. Pérez-Molphe-Balch. 2002.
Organogenesis and Agrobacterium rhizogenes-induced rooting in Pinus maximartinezzii
Rzedowsky and P. pineceana Gordon. Plant Cell Rep. 20: 779-785.
Vosatka, M., Gryndler, M., Jansa, J. and Vohnik, M. 2000. Post vitro mycorrhization and
bacterization of micropropagated strawberry, potato and azalea. Acta Hort. 530: 313324.
Walker, D. R. and Parrott, W. A. 2001. Effect of polyethylene glycol and sugar alcohols on
soybean somatic embryo germination and conversion. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 64: 5562.
Wang, H., Parent, S., Gosselin, A. and Desjardins, Y. 1993. Study of vesicular-arbuscular
mycorrhizal peat-based substrates on symbiosis establishment, acclimatization and growth
of three micropropagated species. J. Am. Soc. Hort. Sci. 118: 896-901.
Yu, T.A., Yeh, S.D., Cheng, Y.H. and Yang, J.S. 2000. Efficient rooting for establishment of
papaya plantlets by micropropagation. Plant Cell Tiss. Org. Cult. 61: 29-35.
Ziv, M. 1986. In vitro hardening and acclimatization of tissue culture plants. In: Plant Tissue
Culture and Its Agricultural Applications. Withers, L.A. and Alderson, P.G. (Eds.)
Buttersworths, London. Pp.187-203.
Ziv, M. 1991. Vitrification: morphological and physiological disorders of in vitro plants. In:
Micropropagation Technology and Applications. Debergh. P.C. and Zimmerman R.H.
(Eds.) Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.45-69.

81

INCORPORATION OF LOW COST OPTIONS
B.S. AHLOOWALIA
Vienna, Austria
J. PRAKASH
In Vitro International Pvt. Ltd,
Bangalore, India
Abstract. For many plants, the conventional methods of propagation are cheaper than tissue- culture
technology. Low cost options can generally be incorporated into the design of the building,
laboratories, working areas, layout of equipment, lighting, heating and production planning to provide
smooth and efficient operations. It is important to select several plants that provide options for
production around the year to allow cash flow and optimal use of equipment and facilities. It is
essential to maintain sufficient mother cultures, and limit the number of subcultures to avoid variation,
and plan production and shipment according to the customer’s demand.

INTRODUCTION
Low cost options can generally be incorporated into the design of the building,
laboratories, working areas, layout of equipment, lighting, and heating to provide smooth and
efficient operations. However, some options are stage-specific to the process of
micropropagation and others are linked to marketing. The following strategies should be
considered before venturing into commercial micropropagation.
Selection of crops
Micropropagation protocols have been developed for a large number of species;
however, only a limited number of plants are being produced on a large scale through
micropropagation. This is because conventional methods of propagation are cheaper than
tissue culture technology or there is a selective market demand. Ornamentals account for
approximately 80% of the world trade in the tissue culture industry. Plants produced by
commercial laboratories should yield steady revenue, e.g. Spathiphyllum, Syngonium, lilies.
Some plants are unique to individual commercial companies. The life cycle of the species and
the cropping system adopted by growers are important criteria to select plants for large-scale
tissue culture. Initially, micropropagation units focused on the production of ornamental
plants that were least affected by the season, e.g. foliage and indoor plants. But to capture
larger markets, commercial tissue culture units have ventured into fruits, vegetables,
landscape and medicinal plants, which provide options for production around the year. This
leads to improved cash flow and optimal use of equipment and facilities. When selecting
specific varieties protected under Plant Breeders Rights, these should be multiplied only with
the agreement of the breeders.
Target markets
Before going commercial, one must ensure that there is a large and expanding market
for the product. Both the domestic and export markets should be explored extensively. It must
be ensured that large contracts are available each year. Products that command a high price
should be preferably chosen.

83

Regularity of despatches
It is essential to plan the production schedule according to the customer’s demand and
despatch the products at the stipulated time. It is not in the interest of the tissue culture facility
to remain idle. Production of different plants should be distributed over the year to make
optimum use of the laboratory facilities. Regularity of despatches adds to the viability of the
business.
End product
It is essential to decide on the type of products to be produced in a tissue culture facility.
These could be plants that are rooted or non-rooted and could be sold in agar or marketed as
hardened propagules in plugs or trays. Relatively small tissue culture units can produce nonrooted microcuttings in large numbers. Rooted microcuttings on the other hand require large
growth room areas. In both cases, dispatching them ex-agar may result in some mortality at
the grower’s end. To reduce mortality, it is important to ship them in-agar. However, in-agar
shipments occupy a large volume, and hence require more cargo space and add to the cost.
Such high transport and cargo charges can only be justified for high value products. The
hardened micropropagated plants in plugs or trays are the easiest to handle by growers.
Prevention of variation in tissue culture
The establishment of mother cultures from explants is a significant part of the
production cost. Production projections can get out of gear due to the lack of sufficient mother
cultures and maintenance of large numbers of such cultures adds to the cost of production.
There is a general consensus that the number of subcultures for explants should be limited to
avoid somaclonal variation. For example, in potato, the number of subcultures is
recommended to be around twenty (Ahloowalia, 2000). Hence, repeated explant culture
initiation becomes necessary to have sufficient number of mother cultures whenever largescale production is planned.
For many plants, it is not known whether limiting the number of subcultures reduces
genetic variation. Many of the plants that are propagated from vegetative parts such as
banana, potato, sweet potato, sugarcane, chrysanthemum and many fruits are polyploids and
well buffered against the expression of mutations and somaclonal variation. If axillary bud
proliferation is used as the strategy of multiplication, the frequency of variation is low. If
variation does occur, the number of variants will rise with increasing number of subcultures
unless there is selective elimination in tissue culture. The high frequency of somaclonal
variation has prevented the use of tissue culture for mass scale propagation of oil palm. In
general, the initiation of cultures from meristem-tip gives low variation in subcultures. Some
of the novel somaclonal variants can be of value in expanding the market (Jain et al., 1998).
Multiplication and hardening
Liquid media reduce the costs of multiplication. Increasing the multiplication rate
through enhanced axillary bud proliferation helps in cutting cost of production. Mechanical
cutting and bioreactors is a valuable option at Stage II (Cf. Chapter 6). In some systems, shoot
elongation and rooting are two separate phases. Combining them in one step by using
appropriate media with auxins and cytokinins is a valid cost cutting strategy. Reducing the
duration in the hardening facility but increasing the survival rate reduces production costs. If
natural light is used during multiplication and rooting, the plants need relatively shorter

84

duration for hardening. Acclimatization in vitro helps in better survival when the plants are
transferred to soil (Ziv, 1986). Loss of plants at the hardening stage contributes to increased
costs of production. A cost-effective system based on natural sunlight for in vitro
acclimatization gives high survival (Savangikar et al., 2002). If grown under artificial
lighting, tissue cultured plants should be kept under shade for some time and only then
subjected to full sun hardening.
Greenhouse facility
Sophisticated and costly greenhouses can be substituted by cost-effective techniques for
hardening in vitro derived plantlets. For this, it is necessary to understand the changes that
tissue-cultured plantlets go through during the transfer from in vitro to in vivo conditions
(Table 1).
Table 1. Changes in the environment for hardening in vitro plants to ex-vitro conditions
In vitro conditions

Ex-vitro conditions

Temperature 25 ± 2° C

Temperature 23-36° C

Light intensity 1200-2000 lux

Light intensity 4000-12000 lux

Narrow spectrum light

Broad spectrum light

Relative humidity 98-100%

Relative humidity 40-80%

Almost non-functional roots

Functional roots

Almost non-functional photosynthetic
system
Exogenous hormones

Functional photosynthetic
system
Endogenous hormones

Sterile conditions

Non-sterile conditions

Micropropagated plantlets should be acclimatized gradually by transferring them to a
clean area under partial shade. In a low-cost hardening system, the culture containers are kept
in the greenhouse with lids loosened. The plants are allowed to grow for 4-6 weeks under
conventional Grow lights TM. This semi-hardens plants, and leads to shoot elongation, which
is usually done under laboratory conditions. Contamination can be controlled with regular
sprays of fungicides and bactericides. The plants are periodically sprayed with water to
maintain humidity. Bench lamps are used to provide light, if and when required. Semihardened elongated shoot clumps are then separated under non-sterile conditions, and rooted
in peat or plugs under thin plastic sheets for 2-3 weeks. This low-cost alternative reduces the
capital cost of hardening by saving laboratory space, labour, and time. This procedure has
been used on a commercial scale for a number of plants such as Gerbera, Spathiphyllum,
Syngonium, African violets, Chrysanthemum, Ficus, Philodendron and other ornamentals in
the Netherlands and Israel (Prakash and Peirik, 1991; Prakash, 1996). The growers in Florida
harden tissue-cultured foliage plants in cavity trays covered with a transparent plastic tray,
thus saving costs of a greenhouse. In some parts of India, hanging the culture plastic bags in
shade hardens tissue-cultured sugarcane plants. Plants produced in this manner are semihardened, and can be delivered to the growers at a relatively cheaper price.

85

Low-cost plastic tunnels (polytunnel) with bio-fertilization can also be used for
hardening, especially in cooler climates. A rectangular pit of desired and manageable size is
dug on a site free of water logging. A frame of bamboo or any other available material is
made above the pit with a gentle slope to one side. The frame is then covered with a clear
polythene sheet, and tied using nylon ropes. The sheet is sealed with mud on three sides,
leaving one side free. The temperature and humidity inside these structures is generally higher
than the outside, and protects the plants from frost. The polythene sheet can be partly opened
to allow air circulation and sunlight as and when required. The added advantage of polypits is
the carbon dioxide fertilization effect and reduced need for watering. The International
Institute for Tropical Agriculture, Ibadan, Nigeria has developed another low cost hardening
alternative. The institute provides the farmers with plants in plastic bags and handling
instructions. For hardening the plants, the farmers hang the plastic bags under tree shade.
REFERENCES
Ahloowalia, B.S. 2000. Stability of micropropagated plants and mini-tubers of potato. In:
Methods and Markers for Quality Assurance in Micropropagation. Cassells, A.C.,
Doyal, B.M. and Curry, R.F. (Eds.) Proc. Internl. Symp. Cork, Ireland Pp.163-164.
Jain, S.M., Brar, D.S. and Ahloowalia, B.S. 1998. Somaclonal Variation and Induced
Mutations in Crop Improvement. Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht.
Prakash, J. 1996. Biovillage Biotechnologies. Rep. Asian Biotechnology and Biodiversity
Farmer Centered Agriculture Resource Management (FARM) Programme,
UNDP/FAO/UNIDO. In Vitro International, Bangalore, India Pp. 56.
Prakash, J. and Peirik, R.L.M. 1991. Horticulture - New Technologies and Applications.
Kluwer Acad. Pub. Dordrecht. Pp.414.
Savangikar, V.A., Savangikar, C., Daga, R.S. and Pathak, S. 2002. Reduction in cost in
micropropagation: achievements and further prospects. 1st Internl. Symp. 'Liquid
System for In Vitro Mass Propagation of Plants', Agric. Univ. Norway, Ås, Norway 29
May - 2 June, 2002
Ziv, M. 1986. In vitro hardening and acclimatization of tissue culture plants. In: Plant Tissue
Culture and Its Agricultural Applications. Withers, L.A. and Alderson, P.G. (Eds.)
Buttersworths, London. Pp.187-203.

86

INTEGRATION OF TECHNOLOGY FROM LAB TO LAND
B.S. AHLOOWALIA
Vienna, Austria
Abstract. The price of the tissue culture derived plants, tubers, bulbs, and cuttings must be
competitive with those obtained from conventional propagation. Many tissue-cultured plants are too
expensive for direct field planting. In such cases, the cost can be reduced by one or more times
conventional propagation of the tissue cultured plants. The uniformity and consistency in field
performance of tissue-cultured plants is important to build confidence of the farmers to integrate such
plants in the production systems

INTRODUCTION
Tissue culture technology contributes significantly to the improvement of agricultural
productivity and food security. However, it must be integrated into production systems in a
cost effective manner. Wherever practical, direct use of the tissue-cultured plants is the best
strategy to obtain the full benefits of this technology. The price of the products, i.e. plants,
tubers, bulbs and cuttings, must be competitive with those obtained from conventional
propagation. While many plants that are propagated from vegetative parts can be
micropropagated, the cost of tissue-cultured plants is still too high for direct growing by the
farmers. For example, micro- and mini-potato tubers and micropropagated plants of
chrysanthemum, strawberry, sugarcane and cassava are too expensive for direct field planting.
In such cases, tissue-cultured plants are grown as super-elite or elite material and the costs are
brought down by conventional propagation one or more times. Thus, the costly tissue-cultured
plants are used as nuclear material, and their further multiplication is by conventional
vegetative propagation in the field to produce large quantities of pathogen-free planting
material. However, the subsequent vegetative multiplication of tissue culture-derived material
in the open environment also exposes them to infection with diseases and viruses that may
increase in successive propagation. In addition, the handling of bulky conventional planting
material, such as potato tubers, banana corms and sugarcane sets adds to the transportation
costs. Hence, the cost of tissue-cultured plants has to be brought down substantially, so that
farmers benefit through increased productivity.
On-farm technology transfer
The most outstanding application of tissue culture in crops that are propagated from
vegetative parts has been the production of disease-free planting material that gives improved
yield and quality. This has been particularly the case in potato, banana, citrus, date palm,
pineapple, papaya and many ornamentals. Seed potato production is a highly specialized
business, and requires highly skilled growers. Currently, all the certified seed potato in Ireland
and Scotland is derived from tissue-cultured plants, which produce micro- or mini-tubers that
form the super-elite seed. The mini-seed tubers are not used for growing the potato crop.
Instead, these are further multiplied by conventional propagation in the field, at least twice,
and sometimes even 3 to 4 times for the production of certified seed tubers. Apart from cost
reduction and high seed quality, the farmers get the same types of seed tubers with which they
are used to. In Canada, many growers have integrated small tissue-culture laboratories for
seed potato production on their farms (Nowak, J. Personal communication). Similarly, the
sugarcane growers in Punjab, India have switched to high quality seed cane that is derived

87

from tissue cultured plants, which are propagated 3 to 4 times from conventional cuttings. The
lead in commercial sugarcane tissue culture technology has been taken by the sugar cane
mills, which have established their own laboratories for large-scale seed cane production. The
state agricultural university provides the disease-free indexed cultures to the sugar mills. Such
a model that includes the university for research and trouble-shooting problems, private
industry (sugar mills) that multiplies the sugarcane seed material through tissue culture, and
cane growers who produce the crop, has been very successful in integrating tissue culture
technology for the benefit of the farmers and processors. This tripartite cooperation has
rapidly replaced conventional sugarcane seed production in the state. Recently, direct planting
of micropropagated sugarcane plants has been profitably undertaken in Maharashtra, India.
In Morocco, citrus indexed scions are multiplied in tissue culture and grown under a
plastic house. Scion cuttings with two-three buds each are then sold to the farmers, who graft
them on either new or old rootstock. This has helped to eradicate many of the citrus viruses
and yet retain the old rootstock plants that are resistant to diseases. In another approach, high
quality disease-free tissue-cultured scions are grafted in vitro onto seedling rootstock.
Millions of such in vitro grafted plants have been distributed to the citrus growers in Spain,
bringing direct benefits to farmers. In Thailand, tissue-cultured chrysanthemum plants,
produced by the Department of Agriculture, are sold to farmers who multiply them further
from conventional cuttings for the production of cut flowers. This procedure has allowed
rapid introduction of new varieties to respond to the market demand. In Vietnam and China
(P. R.), in vitro cultured plants of sweet potato and cassava are distributed directly to the
farmers. The farmers multiply in vitro plants further from conventional cuttings, and produce
sufficient amounts of healthy planting material for their on- farm use. A similar procedure
could be used for the distribution of disease-free material of cassava in Africa where cassava
mosaic virus disease has become a major threat to cassava production.
Perhaps, the most successful on-farm use of tissue culture technology has been in Cuba
where an ordinary village-house is converted into a plant tissue culture facility – a ‘biofactory’. Such a facility employs local labor, particularly housewives, for various operations,
uses low cost media and containers and sunlight, and has the capacity to produce one million
banana or sugarcane plants per year. In banana, the hardened plants are sold to the local
banana growers. A batch of one thousand plants is kept in the nursery to monitor the quality.
The farmers are asked to notify any off-type, which they may observe. This has not only
given the farmers a confidence in the technology but has also resulted in the discovery of
several improved variants among the tissue culture derived populations.
In developed countries, many commercial companies restrict tissue-culture propagation
to the production of in vitro plants, which are used as nucleus or ‘super elite’ material, and are
further multiplied two to three times before being handed over to the farmers as certified
material. Other companies subcontract the production of fully-grown plants on a buy-back
basis for further sale. This approach has been used in the propagation of many ornamental
plants and shrubs in Belgium. In the developing countries, tissue culture must be seen as a
complementary approach to conventional plant propagation, so that the rural job opportunities
are not lost, but strengthened and further expanded. Hence, on-farm conventional
multiplication of the tissue culture propagated material is the cheapest and the most
sustainable method for cost reduction, and for the creation of farmer confidence in the
technology. Of course, the agricultural extension workers and propagation companies must
provide the necessary know-how to the farmers for handling and growing tissue cultured
plants for further multiplication under high health status. Universities and experts should
provide training to farmers and extension workers as being done in several countries.

88

On-farm performance
Even after a decade of introduction of millions of tissue culture plants, the market
covered is less than 1% of the total cultivation under vegetatively propagated crops. Thus,
there is a tremendous scope to use tissue-culture technology to provide growers with nuclear
stocks of shrubs, fruit and forest trees. There is a need to micropropagate hundreds of native
varieties and local cultivars of banana and plantain, cassava, citrus, date palm, ginger, potato,
sweet potato, turmeric, yams, and local tropical fruits, flowers, herbs, medicinal plants and
trees that are propagated from vegetative parts.
The consistency in field performance of tissue-cultured plants is extremely important.
Farmer’s participation is essential in achieving this goal (Bunders et al., 1996). Precision
agricultural management, based on integrated and sustainable crop nutrient practices, is
required to obtain high yields from quality planting material. In some cases, the problem of
unsatisfactory field performance was traced to nutritional imbalance and poor soil conditions
(Savangikar et al., 1999). The commercial micropropagation companies should encourage the
availability and use of site-specific agronomic practices by the growers to ensure sustainable
success. This would provide farmers the latest technology product with minimal risk. Thus, to
achieve expansion of commercial micropropagation, the use of cost-effective technology and
of locally adapted varieties and relevant agronomic practices is necessary.
REFERENCES
Bunders, J., Haverkort, B. and Hiemstra, W. 1996. Biotechnology: Building on Farmers’
Knowledge. Macmillan Education Ltd. London.
Savangikar, V.A., Savangikar, C., Kale, V.R. and Zende, G.K. 1999. Micronutrient
requirements of sugarcane for yield maximization. Bharatiya Sugar, July. Pp.9-18.

89

SUMMARY
Plant tissue culture refers to growing and multiplication of cells, tissues and organs of plants
on defined solid or liquid media under aseptic and controlled environment. Micropropagation
allows rapid production of high quality, disease-free and uniform planting material. The
micropropagation of high quality planting material of ornamentals, and forest and fruit trees
has created new opportunities in global trading for producers, farmers, and nursery owners,
and for rural employment. The plants can be multiplied under a controlled environment
anywhere irrespective of the season and weather on a year-round basis. However,
micropropagation technology is more expensive than the conventional method of plant
propagation. It is a capital-intensive industry, and in some cases the unit cost per plant
becomes unaffordable. Hence, it is necessary to adopt strategies to reduce production cost and
lower the cost per plant.
Plant micropropagation is primarily based on rapid proliferation of tiny stem cuttings, axillary
buds, and to a limited extent of somatic embryos, cell clumps in suspension cultures and
bioreactors. The cultured cells and tissue can take several pathways. The pathways that lead to
the production of true-to-type plants in large numbers are the preferred ones for commercial
multiplication. The process of micropropagation is usually divided into several stages i.e.,
pre-propagation, initiation of explants, subculture of explants for proliferation, shooting and
rooting, and hardening. These stages are universally applicable in large-scale multiplication of
plants. The delivery of hardened small micropropagated plants to growers and market also
requires extra care.
Low-cost tissue culture technology is the adoption of practices and use of equipment to
reduce the unit cost of micropropagule and plant production. Low cost options should lower
the cost of production without compromising the quality of the micropropagules and plants. In
low cost technology cost reduction is achieved by improving process efficiency and better
utilization of resources. Low-cost tissue-culture technology is high priority in agriculture,
horticulture, forestry, and floriculture of many developing countries for the production of
suitably priced high quality planting material.
A number of low-cost alternatives can be used to simplify various operations and reduce the
costs in a tissue culture facility. The physical components of a typical plant tissue culture
facility include equipment and buildings with preparation room, transfer room, culture or
growth room, hardening and weaning area, soil-growing area (greenhouses, plastic tunnels),
packaging and shipping area, and related facilities such as an office, and a store for chemicals,
containers and supplies. The size of the physical components of a tissue culture facility will
vary according to its functional needs, i.e. the volume of production. Careful planning of a
facility can make large savings both in the construction costs and day-to day operations in the
facility. It is recommended that an existing facility should be visited to view the layout and
operational needs before starting a new facility.
Proper choice of media and containers can reduce the cost of micropropagation. The
composition of culture media used for proliferation has a tremendous influence on production
costs. The type of culture vessel influences the efficiency of transfer during subculture and
production of propagules per unit area. The replacement of expensive imported vessels with
reusable glass jars and lids, alternatives to gelling agents, use of household sucrose, and some
medium components can reduce costs of production. Bulk making of media and storage as
deep frozen stocks also reduces labour costs.

91

Artificial lighting of cultures in the growth rooms is one of the most expensive and inefficient
methods in tissue culture technology. Changing the method of illumination from artificial to
natural light is a decisive low cost option in tissue culture. This reduces electricity and capital
costs and also improves the plant quality. Maintaining in vitro cultures at a regulated
temperature with air conditioners adds to the cost but does not contribute to specific plant
quality. Many in vitro growing plants can tolerate wide fluctuations in temperature, and adapt
better to field conditions than those grown under even temperature. Plants can also be
hardened in open shade. Plants hardened under natural light are sturdy, and withstand
transplantation better in the field. Production of plants based on tissue culture technology and
their subsequent growing is a labour intensive system. Even in developing countries, where
labour is relatively less costly, hiring expertise from established R&D laboratories reduces
overhead costs.
Bioreactor-based propagation of plants can increase rate of multiplication and growth of
cultures and reduce space, energy and labour requirements in commercial micropropagation.
They can therefore be attractive to developing countries as regards new or expanding plant
culture facilities, in combination with a conventional laboratory. Bioreactors provide more
precise control of the plant growth gaseous exchange, illumination, medium agitation,
temperature and pH than the conventional culture vessels. However, to be cost-effective, use
of bioreactors requires indexed plant cultures, and attention to aseptic procedures during
handling of plant material otherwise culture contamination leads to massive economic loss.
In micropropagation, the health status of the donor mother plant and of the plants multiplied
from it are among the most critical factors, which determine the success of a tissue culture
operation. The indexing of the mother plants for freedom from viral, bacterial, and fungal
diseases is a normal procedure in large-scale plant propagation through tissue culture. Plants
not originating from pathogen-tested material must be screened for the presence of viruses.
Laboratories, which do not have in-house facilities to carry out plant indexing, should obtain
their indexed stock plants from organizations such as Departments of Agriculture, agricultural
universities or privately owned certified germplasm repositories that routinely produce such
plant material. Batches of micropropagated plants should be tested for freedom from diseases
either in-house or by other laboratories. ELISA has been the most effective method for virus
and pathogen detection in plants. Polymerase chain reaction and nucleic acid hybridization are
more sensitive than ELISA, and can detect pathogens in extremely low amounts.
Quality control is essential to assure production of high quality plants and to have end-users
confidence. Quality standards require the establishment of suitable tests to maintain quality
control. The choice of explant source, freedom of the donor plant from viruses, disease
causing fungi, bacteria, viroids, phytoplasmas, vigour and conformity of the variety, and
elimination of somaclones are critical for maintaining plant quality. Variety identification by
proper labeling at all stages is essential to ensure varietal identity.
Tissue-cultured propagules are produced under a controlled environment. Such plantlets have
small juvenile leaves with reduced photosynthetic capacity, and malfunctioning stomata.
Priming for rooting, shooting, and improved photosynthesis can be achieved with growth
regulators and adjustment to the growing conditions that affect the post-transplanting
performance of the propagules. Vented closures with microbial filters facilitate gas exchange,
reduce ethylene build-up that stunts plant growth, reduces leaf-size, and causes leaf drop in
tissue culture containers. Plantlets produced under photo-autotrophic culture systems on media
with or without sucrose but CO2-enrichment, increased light intensity, good gas exchange and
reduced humidity are more vigorous, have larger root-systems, and are less susceptible to

92

microbial contamination. Plants adapted gradually to the ex-vitro environment have improved
survival upon transfer to soil. Plants in their natural environment are colonized with many
bacteria, fungi, and mycorrhizae. In-vitro or ex-vitro biopriming of micropropagated plants with
such organisms improves plant performance under stress environments, and consequently
enhances yield.
Low cost options can generally be incorporated into the design of the building, laboratories,
working areas, layout of equipment, lighting, heating and production planning to provide
smooth and efficient operations. It is important to select several plants that provide options for
production around the year to allow cash flow and optimal use of equipment and facilities. It
is essential to maintain sufficient mother cultures, and limit the number of subcultures to
avoid variation, and plan production and shipment according to the customer’s demand. The
price of the tissue culture derived plants, tubers, bulbs, and cuttings must be competitive with
those obtained from conventional propagation. Many tissue-cultured plants are too expensive
for direct field planting. In such cases, the cost can be reduced by one or more conventional
propagations of the in vitro plants. The uniformity and consistency in field performance of
tissue-cultured plants is important to build confidence of the farmers to integrate such plants
in the production systems.

93

EQUIPMENT CHECKLIST
The streamlined operation of a tissue culture facility requires a specific layout of the
laboratories and strategic location of the equipment (Fig.1-3). The needs for equipment vary
widely with the type of culture system used and the capacity of the facility. A conventional
tissue culture facility has the following equipment and consumables, some of which are
optional. To make the operations smooth, the equipment should be located in areas where it is
most frequently used.
Preparation room
1. Autoclave (e.g. 125 l capacity, swift lock, single phase, Astell Hearson, UK)
2. Water distillation (20 l reservoir, e.g. Model A4D Aquatron, Bibby, UK)
3. Double sink unit
4. Hot plate with magnetic stirrer (e.g. Autostir, Cabburn)
5. pH meter ( e.g. Delta II, Ciba-Corning)
6. Weighing balance 1 to 200g (e.g. Oertling TP 41)
7. Weighing balance1.0-0001 g (e.g. GA 110-Ohaus)
8. Oven for drying glassware
9. Microwave oven (e.g. M715 Phillips)
10. Refrigerator
11. Freezer (optional depending on the lab requirement)
12. Trolley for carrying hot media flasks and containers
13. Cupboards along the walls for storage of chemicals and presses underneath for storage of
glassware and containers.
Transfer room
1. Laminar Flow cabinets (double bench) (e.g. Gelaire TC 72 or TC48
2. Bench with presses for storage of containers with media.
3. Peristaltic Pump for pouring medium (e.g. MKII, Accuramatic, UK)
4. Height adjustable chairs (computer chairs) or swivel chairs
5. Safety burners (e.g. Touch-a-Matic) and gas cylinder or preferably Glass bead sterilizers
6. Binocular microscope
7. Gyratory shaker (optional)
8. Inverted microscope (optional)
9. Compound microscope
10. Shaker for low speed use, meant to grow shoots and rooting in liquid medium
Growth room
It is desirable that the floors and walls in this room have white tiles. Floors can also be
covered with linoleum instead of white ceramic tiles.
1. Shelving unit frames - each unit is 3.0 x 0.6 m with four tiers spaced 0.45 m apart; the first
tier is 0.15 m above ground. Frames can be made from angle iron similar to that used in
supermarket shelving. A corridor of 0.70-0.75 m should be left between the shelving units
and 1.0 m in the front. The shelves are made of thick wire net or punched light iron sheets
to allow air circulation. Shelving-unit frames can also be made of steel or wood.
2. For artificial lighting, use two 65W cool daylight fluorescent tubes per shelf (8
lights/unit), with chokes located outside the growth room. The time switches (timer
clocks) should be located outside or just at the entrance.
3. Air-conditioning should be located inside and the compressor unit outside. Exhaust fans to
expel hot air linked to reverse thermostats can be used as replacement to air-conditioners
in milder climates, particularly if lighting is from diffused natural daylight.

95

Preparation Room

Transfer Room

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

1. Laminar flow cabinets
2. Bench and presses
3. Peristaltic pump
4. Chairs
5. Safety burner/sterilizers
6. Gas cylinder
7. Binocular microscope
8. Gyratory shaker

Autoclave
Water distillation and sink unit
Hot plate stirrer
pH meter
Weighing balance
Weighing balance
Hot-air oven
Microwave
Refrigerator
Cupboards and presses
Trolley

FIG. 1. A sketch plan for setting up a Plant tissue culture laboratory.

96

FIG. 2. Shelving unit made from angle iron.

4. Thermometer with maximum-minimum temperature recording
5. Light meter for measuring light intensity
Hardening and growing area
1. Shelves made of bamboo
2. Black plastic for flooring
3. Thatching for roofing the hut
Glasshouse
1. Heat dissipating nest (optional)
2. Plastic and pipes for weaning dome (optional)
3. Matting for the floors
4. Hose for watering plants or a watering can
Consumables
Chemicals for media and explant sterilization
Glassware – Duran bottles with rims (100, 250, 500, 1000 ml), glass cylinders (10, 50, 250,
500 1000 ml), beakers (25, 500, 1000 ml); Erlenmeyer flasks (250, 500, 2000, 3000 ml)
Surgical blades and knifes, forceps, and scissors with long handles
Pipettes (0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 5, 25, 50 and100 ml)
Buffers for pH meter
Containers- baby food jars, jam jars, other type of reusable vessels (e.g. Magenta TM)
Nylon Ultra filters
Syringe (25, 100 ml)
97

Suppliers of equipment and chemicals*
Before ordering equipment, it is always good to look for the local supplier and seek advice
from the nearest college or university on the prices, suppliers and alternative products and to
search the Internet for suppliers.
J. Bibby Science Products Ltd., Stone, Staffordshire ST15OS, UK (water still)
Millipore, UK. Ltd., Boulevard Blackmoor Lane, Watford, Herts, WD1 8YW (filters)
Karir International Ltd. 17 Bishops Close, Mays Lane, Arkley, Barnet Herts EN5 2QH, UK
(chemicals, media, tissue culture containers)
Schott Glaswerke, Hattenbergstrasse 10, 6500 Mainz, Germany (bottles and glassware)
Scholte Winschoten, b.v. J.A. Koningstraat 1, 9672 A Winschoten, The Netherlands
(laboratory furniture)
Kord Products Inc. Brampton, ON, Canada (for K1020 plastic trays and covers for plant
acclimatization) http://www.kord-specialty.com
Jiffy Products Ltd., Shippagan, NB, Canada (For Jiffy plugs)
Sigma, St Luis, MO, USA (for chemicals, media, culture vessels, vented closures)
Duchefa, Haarlem, Netherlands (for, chemicals, media, culture vessels, vented closures)
Temporary immersion bioreactor (developed by CIRAD- Vitropic SA, ZAE des Avants,
34270 Saint Mathieu de Tréviers, France http://www.cirad.fr/produits/rita/en/accueil.htm
Pre-sterilized bioreactor: LifeReactorTM, Osmotek Ltd., Rehovot, Israel
www.Osmotek.com
___________________________________________________________________________
*The mention of any make, model and supplier does not constitute a recommendation by
FAO or the IAEA.

98

COMMONLY USED TERMS IN TISSUE CULTURE
Adventitious: development of organs such as buds, leaves, roots, shoots and somatic embryos
from shoot and root tissues and callus.
Asepsis: without infection or contaminating microorganisms.
Aseptic technique: procedures used to prevent the introduction of microorganisms such as fungi,
bacteria, viruses, and phytoplasmas into cell, tissue and organ cultures, and cross
contamination of cultures.
Axenic culture: a culture without foreign or undesired life forms but may include the deliberate
co-culture with different types of cells, tissues or organisms.
Callus: an unorganized mass of differentiated plant cells.
Cell culture: culture of cells or their maintenance in vitro including the culture of single cells.
Cell generation time: the interval between consecutive divisions of a cell.
Cell line: cells that originate from a primary culture at the time of the first successful subculture.
Chemically defined medium: a nutritive solution or substrate for culturing cells in which each
component is specified.
Clonal propagation: asexual multiplication of plants from a single individual or explant.
Clones: a group of plants propagated from vegetative parts, which have been derived by repeated
propagation from a single individual. Clones are considered to be genetically uniform.
Cryopreservation: ultra-low temperature storage of cells, tissues, embryos and seeds.
Differentiated: cultured cells that maintain all or much of the specialized structure and function
typical of the cell type in vivo.
Diploid: cells, tissues and organisms, which have two sets of all chromosomes, except the sex
chromosomes.
Embryo culture: In vitro culture of isolated mature or immature embryos.
In vitro: Latin: "in glass" - culture of an organism or a portion of it in glass or plastic ware on
synthetic media.
Tissue culture: in vitro culture of cells, tissues, organs and plants under aseptic conditions on
synthetic media.
Growth chamber: a chamber used for the incubation of culture containers or plants under
controlled environment
Micropropagation: multiplication of plants from vegetative parts by using tissue culture.
Propagule: a portion of an organism (shoot, leaf, callus, etc.) used for propagation.
Explant: an excised piece or part of a plant used to initiate a tissue culture.
Subculture: the aseptic division and transfer of a culture or portion of that culture to a fresh
nutrient medium.
Meristem: a group of undifferentiated cells situated at the tips of shoots, buds and roots, which
divide actively and give rise to tissue and organs.
Somatic embryos: non-zygotic bipolar embryo-like structures obtained from somatic cells.
Totipotencity: capacity of plant cells to regenerate whole plants when cultured on appropriate
media.
Transgenic: plants that have a piece of foreign DNA.

